






Kmvw 




V«V<W<V 



a/M 



DATE DUE 


MAY 2 


* mm 






































































































































Demco 



n 

3 



• : 



DAVID O. MCKAY LIBRARY 



3 1404 00750 1072 



PROPFPTY OP : 

DAV ,RY 

BYU 

REXBURG ID 83460-0405 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2012 with funding from 
Brigham Young University-Idaho 



http://archive.org/details/capitalcriticalaOOmarx 



CAPITAL: 



ABERDEEN UNIVEKSITY PBESS : JOHN THOMSON, AND J. F. THOMSON, M.A. 



CAPITAL: 

A CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF CAPITALIST 

PRODUCTION 



By KARL MARX 



TRANSLATED FROM THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION, BY 
SAMUEL MOORE AND EDWARD AVELING 



AND EDITED BY 

FREDERICK ENGELS 





HPH' 












z£Jlyp 




^/^^^ffifi 


SSSfEiAv 


ta-W&C&JJ 



New York: APPLETON & CO. 
London : SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO. 

1889. 



CONTENTS. 



Editor's Preface, ....... 

Author's Prefaces — I. To the First Edition, 

II. To the Second Edition, . . . 

PART I. 

COMMODITIES AND MONEY. 

Chapter I. — Commodities, .... 

Section 1. — The two Factors of a Commodity : Use Value and Value (the 

Substance of Value and the Magnitude of Value), . 
Section 2. — The Twofold Character of the Labour embodied in Commodities 
Section 3. — The Form of Value, or Exchange Value, 

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value, 

1. The two Poles of the Expression of Value : Relative Form and 

Equivalent Form, 

2. The Relative Form of Value, 

(a.) The Nature and Import of this Form, 

(6. ) Quantitative Determination of Relative Value, 

3. The Equivalent Form of Value, 

4. I he Elementary Form of Value considered as a "Whole, 

B. Total or Expanded Form of Value, 

1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value, 

2. The Particular Equivalent Form, 

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value, 

C. The General Form of Value, 

1. The altered Character of the Form of Value, . 

2. The interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value 

and of the Equivalent Form, 

3. Transition from the General Form to the Money Form, 

D. The Monoy Form, .... 
Section 4. — The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof, 
Chapter II.— Exchange, .... 
Chapter III. — Money, or the Circulation of Commodities, 
Section 1. — The Measure of Value, 
Section 2. — The Medium of Circulation, 

a. Th<- Metamorphosis of Commodities, 

b. The Currency of Money, 
C. Coin, Afld symbols of Y;ilue, 

Section 3. — Money, .... 

-/. Hoarding, .... 
6. Menus of Payment, 
C. Universal Money, 

PAET II. 

Till'. TKANHI "UMATh'N , ,| \i,.\iY INTO CAPITAL. 

Chwtkk IV. Thi I k n- id Formula for Capital, 

Uhaitkk V. Contradiction! in tha Qanara] Formal* of capital, . 

CiiAiri.K vi. 'i. and Sailing ol Laboni Powar, 



PA HE 
IX 
XV 

xxi 



1 

8 
14 
16 

16 
17 
17 
21 
24 
29 
32 
32 
33 
34 
35 
35 

38 
3 ( J 
40 
41 
56 
M 
06 
76 
78 
88 

LOG 
108 
ill 
1X9 






VI 



Contents. 



PART III. 

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS-VALUE. 

PAOE 

Chapter VII.— The Labour Process and the Process of producing Surplus- 
Value, . . . . . . . 15G 

Section 1. — The Labour Process or the Production of Use-Value, . . 156 

.Section 2. — The Production of Surplus-Value, .... 166 

Chapter VTII.— Constant Capital and Variable Capital, . . 180 

Chapter IX.— The Eate of Surplus- Value, . . . .194 

Section 1. — The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power, . . 194 

Section 2. — The Representation of the Components of the Value of the Pro- 
duct by corresponding proportional Parts of the Product itself, . 203 
Section 3.— Senior's " Last Hour," . . . . .207 

Section 4. — Surplus-Produce, ..... 213 

Chapter X.— The Working-Day, . . . . .214 

Section 1. — The Limits of the Working-Day, .... 214 

Section 2. — The Greed for Surplus-Labour. Manufacturer and Boyard, . 218 
Section 3. — Branches of English Industry without Legal Limits to Exploita- 
tion, . . . . . . .227 

Section 4.— Day and Night Work. The Relay System, . . .241 

Section 5. — The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Laws for 
the Extension of the Working-Day from the Middle of the 14th to the 
End of the 17th Century, . . . . .249 

Section 6. — The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Compulsory Limita- 
tion by Law of the Working-Time. The English Factory Acts, 1833 to 
1864, . . . . . . .263 

Section 7. — The Struggle for a Normal Working-Day. Re-action of the 

English Factory Acts on Other Countries, . . . 284 

Chapter XL— Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value, . . .289 

PART IV. 

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE. 

Chapter XII.— The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value, . . .300 

Chapter XIII. — Co-Operation, . . . . .311 

Chapter XIV.— Division of Labour and Manufacture, . . . 3l7 

Section 1. — Twofold Origin of Manufacture, .... 327 
Section 2. — The Detail Labourer and his Implements, . . 330 

Section 3. — The two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture: Heterogeneous 

Manufacture, Serial Manufacture, .... 333 

Section 4. — Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division of Labour in 

Society, . . . . . . .343 

Section 5. — The Capitalistic Character of Manufacture, . . 353 



VOL. II. 

Chapter XV.— Machinery and Modern Industry, 

Beetion 1. — The Development of Machinery, 

faction 2. — The Value transferred by Machinery to the Product, 



365 
365 
382 



Contents. vii 

PAGE 

Section 3. — The Proximate Effects of Machinery on the Workman, . 391 

a. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by Capital. 

The Employment of Women and Children. . . 391 

b. Prolongation of the Working-Day, . . . 400 

c. Intensification of Labour, .... 107 

Section 4.— The Factory, . . . . . .418 

Section 5. — The Strife between Workman and Machinery, . . 427 
Section 6. — The Theory of Compensation as regards the Workpeople dis- 
placed by Machinery, ...... 438 

Section 7. — Repulsion and Attraction of Workpeople by the Factory System. 

Crises of the Cotton Trade, ..... 449 

Section 8. — Revolution effected in Manufacture, Handicrafts, and Domestic 

Industry by Modern Industry, ..... 462 
a. Overthrow of Co-Operation based on Handicraft and on Divi- 
sion of Labour, ..... 462 
6. Re-action of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domes- 
tic Industries, ..... 464 

c. Modern Manufacture, ..... 466 

d. Modern Domestic Industry, .... 469 

e. Passage of Modern Manufacture and Domestic Industry into 

Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of this Re- 
volution by the Application of the Factory Acts to those In- 
dustries, ...... 474 

Section 9. —The Factory Acts. Sanitary and Eductional Clauses of the same. 

Their general Extension in England, . . . 4S5 

Section 10. — Modern Industry and Agriculture, . . . 512 

PART. V. 

THE PRODUCTION OP ABSOLUTE AND OF RELATIVE SURPLUS VALUE. 

Chapter XVI.— Absolute and Relative Surplus- Value, . . . 516 

Chapter XVII. — Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in 

Surplus-Value, ...... 527 

I. Length of the Working Day and Intensity of Labour constant. Pro- 

ductiveness of Labour variable, .... 688 

II. Working Day constant. Productiveness of Labour constant. In- 

tensity of Labour variable, .... 533 

III. — Productiveness and Intensity of Labour constant. Length of the 

Working Day variable, ..... 535 
IV. Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness, and In- 
tensity of Labour, ..... 687 
(1.) Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with ■ simultaneous 

lengthening of tin: Working 1 > iv, . . . 687 

(2.) Increasing Intensity and PfcodootiTMMM of Labour with Minul- 

MUMOOI Shortening of the Working Day, . . 688 

GHAPTD XVIII. — Various Formuhu for the Rate of Surplus- Value, . B 1 1 

PART VI. 

WA'. 

Ofl a itkk XIX.— The Transformation of the Value (a Btfoljtl 

of Labour -I\»wer into Wage*, .... 

Cn.UTKK XX. -Tim.- W | ..... 668 

Ofl kPTH XXI. - l'l.-o \\ ..... 

Cu.u-mi XXII.— National 1>. lofWag . . . 678 



Vlll 



Contents 



PART VII. 

THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL. 

Chapter XXIII. — Simple Her roduction, . . . . 

Chapter XXIV. — Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital, 

Section 1. — Capitalist Production on a progressively increasing Scale. Transi- 
tion of the Laws of Property that characterise Production of Com- 
modities into Laws of Capitalist Appropriation, . 

Section 2. — Erroneous Conception, by Political Economy, of Reproduction 
on a progressively increasing Scale, 

Section 3. — Separation of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue. The 
Abstinence Theory, ..... 

Section 4. — Circumstances that, independently of the proportional Division 
of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue, determine the 
Amount of Accumulation. Degree of Exploitation of Labour- 
Power. Productivity of Labour. Growing Difference in Amount 
between Capital employed and Capital consumed. Magnitude 
of Capital advanced, ..... 

Section 5. — The so-called Labour Fund, .... 

Chapter XXV. — The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, 

Section 1. - The increased Demand for Labour-Power that accompanies 
Accumulation, the Composition of Capital remaining the same, 

Section 2. — Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital simul 
taneously with the Progress of Accumulation and of the Concen 
tration that accompanies it, . 

Section 3. — Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus-Population, or 
Industrial Reserve Army, 

Section 4. — Different Forms of the Relative Surplus -Population. The General 
Law of Capitalistic Accumulation, . 

Section 5. — Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, 
a. England from 1846 to 1866, 
6. The badly paid Strata of the British Industrial Class 

c. The Nomad Population, 

d. Effect of Crises on the best paid Part of the "Working Clas9, 
6. The British Agricultural Proletariat, 

/. Ireland, ..... 

PART VIII. 

the so-called primitive accumulation. 

Chapter XXVI.— The Secret of Primitive Accumulation, 

Chapter XXVII. — Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the 

Land, ...... 

Chapter XXVIII. Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated from the 

End of the 15th Century. Forcing down of Wages by Acts of 

Parliament, ..... 
Chapter XXIX.— Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer, 
Chapter XXX. — Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Crea 

tion of the Home Market for Industrial Capital, 
(' i i a pter XXXI. —Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist, . 
Chapter XXXII. — Historical Tendency of Capitalistic Accumulation, 
Chapter XXXIII.— The Modern Theory of Colonization, 

Works and Authors quoted in " Capital." . 



PA.OK 

577 
592 



592 
598 
602 



610 
621 
625 

625 



635 

642 

655 
664 
664 
670 
681 
685 
691 
719 



736 

740 



758 
766 

769 
774 
786 
790 
801 



EDITOR'S PREFACE. 



THE publication of an English version of u Das 
Kapital " needs no apology. On the contrary, an 
explanation might be expected why this English version 
has been delayed until now, seeing that for some years past 
the theories advocated in this book have been constantly 
referred to, attacked and defended, interpreted and mis- 
interpreted, in the periodical press and the current 
literature of both England and America. 

When, soon after the author's death in 1883, it be- 
came evident that an English edition of the work was 
really required, Mr. Samuel Moore, for many years a 
friend of Marx and of the present writer, and than 
whom, perhaps, no one is more conversant with the 
book itself, consented to undertake the translation which 
the literary executors of Marx were anxious to lay be- 
fore the public. It was understood that I should com- 
pare the MS. with the original work, and suggest such 
alterations as I might deem advisable. When, by and 
by, it was found that Mr. Moore's professional occupa- 
tions prevented him from finishing the translation as 
quickly as we all desired, we gladly accepted Dr. A.veling 9 s 
offer to undertake a portion of the work; jit the same 
time Mrs. Aveling, Marx's youngesi daughter, offered to 
check the quotations and to restore the original text of 



x Editors Preface, 

the numerous passages taken from English authors and 
Bluebooks and translated bv Marx into German. This 
has been done throughout, with but a few unavoidable 
exceptions. 

The following portions of the book have been trans- 
lated by Dr. Aveling : (1) Chapters X. (The Working 
Day), and XL (Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value) ; (2) 
Part VI. (Wages, comprising Chapters XIX. to XXII.) ; 
(3) from Chapter XXIV, Section 4 (Circumstances that 
&c.) to the end of the book, comprising the latter part 
of Chapter XXIV., Chapter XXV., and the whole of 
Part VIII. (Chapters XXVL to XXXIII.) ; (4) the two 
Authors prefaces. All the rest of the book has been 
done by Mr. Moore. While, thus, each of the trans- 
lators is responsible for his share of the work only, I 
bear a joint responsibility for the whole. 

The third German edition, which has been made 
the basis of our work throughout, was prepared by 
me, in 1883, with the assistance of notes left by the 
author, indicating the passages of the second edition 
to be replaced by designated passages, from the 
French text published in 1873. 1 The alterations thus 
effected in the text of the second edition generally coin- 
cided with changes prescribed by Marx in a set of MS. 
instructions for an English translation that was planned, 
about ten years ago, in America, but abandoned chiefly for 
want of a fit and proper translator. This MS. was placed 
at our disposal by our old friend Mr. F. A. Sorge of 
Hoboken N.J. It designates some further interpolations 
from the French edition ; but, being so many years older 

1 M Le Capital," par Karl Marx. Traduction de M. J. Roy, entiere- 
mentrevisee parl'autour. Paris. Lachatre.'' This translation, especially in 
the latter part of the book, contains considerable alterations in and additions 
to the text of the second German edition. 



Editors Preface. xi 

than the final instructions for the third edition, I did not 
consider myself at liberty to make use of it otherwise 
than sparingly, and chiefly in cases where it helped us 
over difficulties. In the same way, the French text has 
been referred to in most of the difficult passages, as an 
indicator of what the author himself was prepared to 
sacrifice wherever something of the full import of the 
original had to be sacrificed in the rendering. 

There is, however, one difficulty we could not spare 
the reader : the use of certain terms in a sense different 
from what they have, not only in common life, but in 
ordinary political economy. But this was unavoidable. 
Every new aspect of a science involves a revolution in 
the technical terms of that science. This is best shown by 
chemistry, where the whole of the terminology is radically 
changed about once in twenty years, and where you will 
hardly find a single organic compound that has not gone 
through a whole series of different names. Political 
Economy has generally been content to take, just as they 
were, the terms of commercial and industrial life, and to 
operate with them, entirely failing to see that by so doing, 
it confined itself within the narrow circle of ideas 
expressed by those terms. Thus, though perfectly aware 
that both profits and rent are but sub-divisions, frag- 
ments of that unpaid part of the product which the 
labourer has to supply to his employer (its first appro- 
priator, though not its ultimate exclusive owner), yet 
even classical Political Economy never went beyond 
the received notions of profits and cent, never examined 
this unpaid part of the product (called by Marx surplus- 
product) in its integrity as a whole, and therefore never 
arrived at a clear comprehension, either of its origin and 
nature, < >r of the laws that regulate tlu i subsequent distri- 
bution of its value. Similarly all industry, not agricultural 



xii Editor s Preface, 

or handicraft, is indiscriminately comprised in the term of 
manufacture, and thereby the distinction is obliterated be- 
tween two great and essentially different periods of econ- 
omic history: the period of manufacture proper, based oa 
the division of manual labour, and the period of modern 
industry based on machinery. It is, however, self-evi- 
dent that a theory which views modern capitalist pro- 
duction as a mere passing stage in the economic history 
of mankind, must make use of terms different from those 
habitual to writers who look upon that form of produc- 
tion as imperishable and final. 

A word respecting the author's method of quoting 
may not be out of place. In the majority of cases, the 
quotations serve, in the usual way, as documentary evi- 
dence in support of assertions made in the text. But in many 
instances, passages from economic writers are quoted in 
order to indicate when, where, and by whom a certain 
proposition was for the first time clearly enunciated. 
This is done in cases where the proposition quoted is of im- 
portance as being a more or less adequate expression of the 
conditions of social production and exchange prevalent 
at the time, and quite irrespective of Marx's recognition, 
or otherwise, of its general validity. These quotations, 
therefore, supplement the text by a running commentary 
taken from the history of the science. 

Our translation comprises the first book of the work 
only. But this first book is in a great measure a whole 
in itself, and has for twenty years ranked as an inde- 
pendent work. The second book, edited in German 
by me, in 1885, is decidedly incomplete without the third, 
which cannot be published before the end of 1887. 
When Book III. has been brought out in the original 
German, it will then be soon enough to think about 
preparing an English edition of both. 



Editor s Preface, xiii 

11 Das Kapital " is often called, on the Continent, 
" the Bible of the working class." That the conclusions 
arrived at in this work are daily more and more becoming 
the fundamental principles of the great working class 
movement, not only in Germany and Switzerland, but in 
France, in Holland and Belgium, in America, and even 
in Italy and Spain ; that everywhere the working class 
more and more recognises, in these conclusions, the most 
adequate expression of its condition and of its aspirations, 
nobody acquainted with that movement will deny. 
And in England, too, the theories of Marx, even at this 
moment, exercise a powerful influence upon the socialist 
movement which is spreading in the ranks of " cultured" 
people no less than in those of the working class. But 
that is not all. The time is rapidly approaching when 
a thorough examination of England's economic position 
will impose itself as an irresistible national necessity. The 
working of the industrial system of this country, impos- 
sible without a constant and rapid extension of pro- 
duction, and therefore of markets, is coming to a dead 
stop. Free trade has exhausted its resources ; even 
Manchester doubts this its quondam economic gospel. 1 
Foreign industry, rapidly developing, stares English pro- 
duction in the face everywhere, not only in protected, but 
also in neutral markets, and even on this side of the 
Channel. While the productive power increases in a 
geometric, the extension of markets proceeds at best in 
an arithmetic ratio. The decennial cycle of stagnation, 

1 At the quarterly meeting of the Bdanoheater Chamber of Commerce) 
held thia afternoon, a warm discussion took place on tho subject of Free 
Trade. A resolution was moved to the eflool that " having waited in vain 
4u years f< t other nations to follow the Free Trade examp la of England, 
this Chamber thinks die time has now arrived boreeoneider thai poeition." 
Tin' resolution was rejected by i majority of one only, the figures i • 
'Jl for, and 29 against. Rmn/ing Standard, Nov. 1, L88& 



xiv Editor s Preface. 

prosperity, over-production and crisis, ever recurrent 
from 1825 to 1867, seems indeed to have run its course ; 
but only to land us in the slough of despond of a per- 
manent and chronic depression. The sighed-for period 
of prosperity will not come ; as often as we seem to per- 
ceive its heralding symptoms, so often do they again 
vanish into air. Meanwhile, each succeeding winter brings 
up afresh the great question, "what to do with the 
unemployed ; " but while the number of the unemployed 
keeps swelling from year to year, there is nobody to 
answer that question ; and we can almost calculate the 
moment when the unemployed losing patience, will 
take their own fate into their own hands. Surely, at such 
a moment, the voice ought to be heard of a man whose 
whole theory is the result of a life-long study of the 
economic history and condition of England, and whom 
that study led to the conclusion that, at least in Europe, 
England is the only country where the inevitable social 
revolution might be effected entirely by peaceful and 
legal means. He certainly never forgot to add that he 
hardly expected the English ruling classes to submit, 
without a " pro-slavery rebellion," to this peaceful and 
legal revolution. 

FREDERICK KXGELS. 

November 5, 1886. 



AUTHOR'S PREFACES. 



I. T THE FIRST EDITION. 

THE work, the first volume of which I now submit 
to the public, forms the continuation of my " Zur 
Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie ' ( A contribution to 
the criticism of Political Economy) published in 1859. 
The long pause between the first part and the continu- 
ation is due to an illness of many years' duration that 
again and again interrupted my work. 

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in 
the first three chapters of this volume. This is done 
not merely for the sake of connection and completeness. 
The presentation of the subject-matter is improved. As 
far as circumstances in any way permit, many points 
only hinted at in the earlier book are here worked out 
more fully, whilst, conversely, points worked out fully 
there are only touched upon in this volume. The 
sections on the history of the theories of value and of 
money are now, of course, left out altogether. The 
reader of the earlier work will find, however, in the 
notes to the first chapter additional sources of reference 
relative to the history of those theories. 

Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To 
understand the first chapter, especially the section that 
contains the analysis of commodities, will, therefore, pre- 
sent the greatest difficulty. That which concerns more 



xvi Authors Prefaces. 

especially the analysis of the substance of value and the 
magnitude of value, I have, as much as it was possible, 
popularised. 1 The value-form, whose fully developed 
shape is the money form, is very elementary and simple. 
Nevertheless, the human mind has for more than 2000 
years sought in vain to get to the bottom of it, whilst on 
the other hand, to the successful analysis of much more 
composite and complex forms, there has been at least an 
approximation. Why? Because the body, as an organic 
whole, is more easy of study than are the cells of that 
body. In the analysis of economic forms, moreover, 
neither microscopes nor chemical reagents are of use. 
The force of abstraction must replace both. But in 
bourgeois society the jommodity-form of the product of 
labour — or the value-form of the commodity — is the 
economic cell-form. To the superficial observer, the 
analysis of these forms seems to turn upon minutiae. It 
does in fact deal with minutiae, but they are of the same 
order as those dealt with in microscopic anatomy. 

With the exception of the section on value-form, 
therefore, this volume cannot stand accused on the score 
of difficulty. I pre-suppose, of course, a reader who is 
willino; to learn something new and therefore to think 
for himself. 

The physicist either observes physical phenomena 

1 This is the more necessary, as even the section of Ferdinand Lassalle's 
work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which he professes to give "the intel- 
lectual quintessence " of my explanations on these subjects, contains im- 
portant mistakes. If Ferdinand Lassalle has borrowed almost literally 
from my writings, and without any acknowledgment, all the general 
theoretical propositk l as in his economic works, e.<y., those on the historical 
character of capital, on the connection between the conditions of produc- 
tion and the mode of production, &c, &c. even to the terminology created 
by me, this may perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda. I am here, 
of course, not speaking of his detailed working out and application of these 
propositions, with which I have nothing to do. 



Author s Prefaces, xvii 

where they occur in their most typical form and most 
free from disturbing influence, or, wherever possible, he 
makes experiments under conditions that assure the 
occurrence of the phenomenon in its normality. In this 
work I have to examine the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion, and the conditions of prod uction and exchange cor- 
responding to that mode. Up to the present time, their 
classic ground is England. That is the reason why Eng- 
land is used as the chief illustration in the development 
of my theoretical ideas. If, however, the German reader 
shrugs his shoulders at the condition of the English in- 
dustrial and agricultural labourers, or in optimist fashion 
comforts himself with the thought that in Germany 
things are not nearly so bad ; I must plainly tell him, 
" De te fabula narratur I " 

Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or 
lower degree of development of the social antagonisms 
that result from the natural laws of capitalist production. 
It is a question of these laws themselves, of these 
tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevit- 
able results. The country that is more developed indus- 
trially only shows, to the less developed, the image of 
its own future. 

But apart from this. Where capitalist production La 
fully naturalised among the Germans (for instance, in the 
factories proper) the condition of things is mudi worse 
than in England, because the counterpoise oi the Factory 
Acts is wanting, In all other spheres, we, like all the 
of Continental Western Europe, suffer not only from 
the development ofcapitalisl production, but also from 
the incompleteness of that development. Alongside of 
modern evils, a whole series of inherited evils oppr 
us, arising from the passive survival of antiquated m >1 - 
of production, with their inevitable train of social and 



xviii Authors Prefaces. 

political anachronisms. We suffer not only from the 
living, but from the dead. Le mort saisit le vif ! 

The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Con- 
tinental Western Europe are, in comparison with those 
of England, wretchedly compiled. But they raise the 
veil just enough to let us catch a glimpse of the Medusa 
head behind it. We should be appalled at the state of 
things at home, if, as in England, our governments and 
parliaments appointed periodically commissions of en- 
quiry into economic conditions; if these commissions were 
armed with the same plenary powers to get at the truth; 
if it was possible to find for this purpose men as competent, 
as free from partisanship and respect of persons as are 
the English factory-inspectors, her medical reporters 
on public health, her commissioners of enquhy into the 
exploitation of women and children, into housing and 
food. Perseus wore a magic cap that the monsters 
he hunted down might not see him. We draw the 
magic cap down over eyes and ears as a make-believe 
that there are no monsters. 

Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th 
century, the American war of independence sounded the 
tocsinfor the European middle-class, so in the 19th century, 
the American civil war sounded it for the European 
working-class. In England the progress of social dis- 
integration is palpable. When it has reached a certain 
point, it must re-act on the continent. There it will take 
a form more brutal or more humane, according to the 
degree of development of the working-class itself. Apart 
from higher motives, therefore, their own most impor- 
tant interests dictate to the classes that are for the 
nonce the ruling ones, the removal of all legally remov- 
able hindrances to the free development of the working 
class. For this reason, as well as others, I have given 



Author's Prefaces. xix 

so large a space in this volume to the history, the de- 
tails, and the results of English factory legislation. One 
nation can and should learn from others. And even 
when a society has got upon the right track for the dis- 
covery of the natural laws of its movement — and it is the 
ultimate aim of this work, to lay l^are the economic law 
of motion of modern society — it can neither clear by 
bold leaps, nor remove by legal enactments, the obstacles 
offered by the successive phases of its normal develop- 
ment. But it can shorten and lessen the birth-pangs. 

To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I 
paint the capitalist and the landlord in no sense couloir 
de rose. But here individuals are dealt with only in so far 
as they are the personifications of economic categoric-, 
embodiments of particular class-relations and dass- 
interests. My stand-point, from which the evolution of 
the economic formation of society is viewed as a process 
of natural history, can less than any other make the 
individual responsible for relations whose creature he 
socially remains, however much he may subjectively 
raise himself above them. 

In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific 
enquiry meets not merely the same enemies as in all 
other domains. The peculiar nature of the material it 
deals with, summons as foes into the field of battle the 
most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human 
breast, the Furies of private interest. The English Estab- 
lished Church, e.g., will more readily pardon an attack 
on 88 of its 39 articles than onA of its incora Now- 
adays atheism itself is culpa levis^ as compared with 
criticism of existing property relations. Nevertheless, 
there is an unmistakable advance. I refer, ».;/.. to the 
bluebook published within the last few weeks; "Corre- 
Dondence with Her Majesty's Missions Abroad, regard 



xx Author s Prefaces. 

ing Industrial Questions and Trades' Unions." The 
representatives of the English Crown in foreign countries 
there declare in so many words that in Germany, in 
France, to be brief, in all the civilised states of the 
European continent, a radical change in the existing 
relations between capital and labour is as evident and 
inevitable as in England. At the same time, on the 
other side of the Atlantic Ocean, Mr. Wade, vice-presi- 
dent of the United States, declared in public meetings 
that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical change of 
the relations of capital and of property in land is next 
upon the order of the day. These are signs of the 
times, not to be hidden by purple mantles or black 
cassocks. They do not signify that to-morrow a miracle 
will happen. They show that, within the ruling-classes 
themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the present 
society is no solid crystal, but an organism capable of 
change, and is constantly changing. 

The second volume of this work will treat of the pro- 
cess of the circulation of capital 1 (Book II.), and of the 
varied forms assumed by capital in the course of its 
development (Book III.), the third and last volume 
(Book IV.), the history of the theory. 

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. 
As to the prejudices of so-called public opinion, to which 
1 have never made concessions, now as aforetime the 
maxim of the great Florentine is mine : 

" Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti." 

KARL MARX. 

London, July 25, 18G7. 

1 On p. 570 the author explains what he comprises under this head. 



Author 's Prefaces. ;xxi 

II. — TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

To the present moment Political Economy, in Ger- 
many, is a foreign science. Gustav von Gulich in his 
" Historical description of Commerce, Industry," &c, T 
especially in the two first volumes published in 1830, 
has examined at length the historical circumstances that 
prevented, in Germany, the development of the capitalist 
mode of production, and consequently the development, 
in that country, of modern bourgeois society. Thus the 
soil whence Political Economy springs was wanting. 
This " science" had to be imported from England and 
France as a ready-made article ; its German professors 
remained schoolboys. The theoretical expression of a 
foreign reality was turned, in their hands, into a col- 
lection of dogmas, interpreted by them in terms of the 
petty trading world around them, and therefore mis- 
interpreted. The feeling of scientific impotence, a 
feeling not wholly to be repressed, and the uneasy con- 
sciousness of having to touch a subject in reality foreign 
to them, was but imperfectly concealed, either under a 
parade of literary and historical erudition, or by an 
admixture of extraneous material, borrowed from the so- 
called "Kameral" sciences, a medley of smatterings, 
througli whose purgatory the hopeless candidate for the 
German bureaucracy has to pass. 

Since 1848 capitalist production has developed rapidly 

in Germany, and at the present time it is in the full 
bloom of speculation and swindling. But fate is still 
unpropitious to our professional economists. A t the 
time when they were able to deal with Political Economy 
in a straightforward fashion, modern economic conditions 

n Q ei chich tliche Dentellung del Brodeli, dei Gewerbt mid del Acker- 
beiii, &c, \<.M Ghiitev ron Gulich. B roll., Jen*, L830 15. 



xxii Author s Prefaces. 

did not actually exist in Germany. And as soon as these 
conditions did come into existence, they did so under cir- 
cumstances that no longer allowed of their being really 
and impartially investigated within the bounds of the 
bourgeois horizon. In so far as Political Economy 
remains within that horizon, in so far, i.e., as the capita- 
list regime is looked upon as the absolutely final form of 
social production, instead of as a passing historical phase 
of its evolution, Political Economy can remain a science 
only so long as the class-struggle is latent or manifests 
itself only in isolated and sporadic phenomena. 

Let us take England. Its political economy belongs 
to the period in which the class-struggle was as yet un- 
developed. Its last great representative, Ricardo, in 
the end, consciously makes the antagonism of class- 
interests, of wages and profits, of profits and rent, the 
starting-point of his investigations, naively taking this 
antagonism for a social law of nature. But by this 
start the science of bourgeois economy had reached the 
limits beyond which it could not pass. Already in the 
lifetime of Ricardo, and in opposition to him, it was met 
by criticism, in the person of Sismondi. 1 

The succeeding period, from 1820 to 1830, was 
notable in England for scientific activity in the domain 
of Political Economy. It was the time as well of the 
vulgarising and extending of Ricardo's theory, as of the 
contest of that theory with the old school. Splendid 
tournaments were held. What was done then, is little 
known to the Continent generally, because the polemic 
is for the most part scattered through articles in reviews, 
occasional literature and pamphlets. The unprejudiced 
character of this polemic — although the theory of 

j See my work " Zur Kritik, &c," p. 30. 



Author s Prefaces. xxiii 

Ricardo already serves, in exceptional cases, as a weapon 
of attack upon bourgeois economy — is explained by the 
circumstances of the time. On the one hand, modern 
industry itself was only just emerging from the age of 
childhood, as is shown by the fact that with the crisis 
of 1825 it for the first time opens the periodic cycle of 
its modern life. On the other hand, the class-stru^le 
between capital and labour is forced into the background, 
politically by the discord between the governments and 
the feudal aristocracy gathered around the Holy Alliance 
on the one hand, and the popular masses, led by the bour- 
geoisie on the other; economically by the quarrel between 
industrial capital and aristocratic landed property — a 
quarrel that in France was concealed by the opposition 
between small and large landed property, and that 
in England broke out openly after the Corn Laws. The 
literature of Political Economy in England at this time 
calls to mind the stormv forward movement in France 
after Dr. Quesnay's death, but only as a Saint Martin's 
summer reminds us of spring. With the year 1830 
came the decisive crisis. 

In France and in England the bourgeoisie had con- 
quered political power. Thenceforth, the class-struggle, 
practically as well as theoretically, took on more and 
more outspoken and threatening forms. It sounded the 
knell of scientific bourgeois economy. It was thenceforth 
no Longer a question, whether this theorem or that was 
true, but whether it was useful to capita] <>r harmful, 

expedient or inexpedient, politically dangerous or not. 
[n place of disinterested enquirers, there were hired prize- 
fighters; in place of genuine scientific research, the bad 
conscience and the evil intent of apologetic. Still, even 
the obtrusive pamphlets with which the A.nti-Corn Law 
League, led by the manufacturers Cobden and Bright, 



xxiv Author's Prefaces. 

deluged the world, have a historic interest, if no scientific 
one, on account of their polemic against the landed aris- 
tocracy. But since then the Free Trade legislation, 
inaugurated by Sir Robert Peel, has deprived vulgar 
economy of this its last sting. 

The Continental revolution of 1848-9 also had its re- 
action in England. Men who still claimed some scien- 
tific standing and aspired to be something more than 
mere sophists and sycophants of the ruling-classes, tried 
to harmonise the Political Economy of capital with the 
claims, no longer to be ignored, of the proletariat. 
Hence a shallow syncretism, of which John Stuart Mill 
is the best representative. It is a declaration of bank- 
ruptcy by bourgeois economy, an event on which the 
great Russian scholar and critic, N. Tschernyschewsky, 
has thrown the light of a master mind in his " Outlines 
of Political Economy according to Mill." 

In Germany, therefore, the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion came to a head, after its antagonistic character had 
already, in France and England, shown itself in a fierce 
strife of classes. And meanwhile, moreover, the German 
proletariat had attained a much more clear class-con- 
sciousness than the German bourgeoisie. Thus, at the 
very moment when a bourgeois science of political 
economy seemed at last possible in Germany, it had in 
reality again become impossible. 

Under these circumstances its professors fell into two 
groups. The one set, prudent, practical business folk, 
flocked to the banner of Bastiat, the most superficial 
and therefore the most adequate representative of the 
apologetic of vulgar economy ; the other, proud of the 
professorial dignity of their science, followed John 
Stuart Mill in his attempt to reconcile irreconcilables. 
Just as in the classical time of bourgeois economy, so 



Author s Prefaces. xxv 

also in the time of its decline, the Germans remained 
mere schoolboys, imitators and followers, petty retailers 
and hawkers in the service of the great foreign whole- 
sale concern. 

The peculiar historic development of German society 
therefore forbids, in that country, all original work in 
bourgeois economy ; but not the criticism of that 
economy. So far as such criticism represents a class, it 
can only represent the class whose vocation in history 
is the overthrow of the capitalist mode of production 
and the final abolition of all classes — the proletariat. 

The learned and unlearned spokesmen of the German 
bourgeoisie tried at first to kill " Das Kapital " by silence, 
as they had managed to do with my earlier writings. As 
soon as they found that these tactics no longer fitted in 
with the conditions of the time, they wrote, under pretence 
of criticising my book, prescriptions " for the tranquillisa- 
tion of the bourgeois mind." But they found in the 
workers' press — see, e.g., Joseph Dietzgen's articles in 
the " Volksstaat " — antagonists stronger than themselves, 
to whom (down to this very day) they owe a reply. 1 

An excellent Russian translation of " Das Kapital " ap- 

1 The mealy-mouthed babblen of German vulgar economy fell foul of 
the stylo of my book. No one can feel the literary shortcomings in " Das 
Kapital " more strongly than T myself. Yet I will for the benefit and the 
enjoyment <>f these gentlemen and their public quote in this connection 
one Knglish and one Russian notice. The "Saturday Eteriew," always 

hostile to my views, said in its not ice of the first edition : " The pre* 
tion of the subject invests the driest economic questions with a certain 

peculiar charm." The "gfc Petersburg Journal" (Sankl Peterburgskie 
Viedomosti), in Its issue of April 20, 1872, says: "The presentation of 
the subject, with the exception of one or two exceptionally special parts, 
it distinguished by its oomprehensibility by the general reader, its clear 

ness, and, in spite of the Scientific intrna-y of the subject, by an unusual 
1 veliness. In this respect tin; author in no way resembles . . . the 

majority of German soholars who . . . write then- books in s Ian 

dry and obscure that the heads of ordinary mortal 



xxv i Authors Prefaces, 

peared in the spring of 1872. The edition of 3000 
copies is already nearly exhausted. As early as 1871, 
A. Sieber, Professor of Political Economy in the Univer- 
sity cf Kiev, in his work u David Ricardo's Theory of 
Value and of Capital," referred to my theory of value, of 
money and of capital, as in its fundamentals a necessary 
sequel to the teaching of Smith and Ricardo. That 
which astonishes the Western European in the reading 
of this excellent work, is the author's consistent and firm 
grasp of the purely theoretical position. 

That the method employed in "Das Kapital" has 
been little understood, is shown by the various concep- 
tions, contradictory one to another, that have been 
formed of it. 

Thus the Paris Revue Posivzste reproaches me in that, 
on the one hand, I treat economics metaphysically, and 
on the other hand — imagine ! — confine myself to the 
mere critical analysis of actual facts, instead of writing 
receipts (Comtist ones ?) for the cook-shops of the future. 
In answer to the reproach in re metaphysics, Professor 
Sieber has it : " In so far as it deals with actual theory, 
the method of Marx is the deductive method of the 
whole English school, a school whose failings and virtues 
are common to the best theoretic economists." M. Block 
— " Les theoriciens du socialisme en Allemagne, Extrait 
du Journal des Economistes, Juillet et Aout 1872 " — 
makes the discovery that my method is analytic and 
says : " Par cet ouvrage M. Marx se classe parmi les 
esprits analytiques les plus eminents." German reviews, 
of course, shriek out at " Hegelian sophistics." The 
European Messenger of St. Peterburg, in an article deal- 
ing exclusively with the method of " Das Kapital v 
(May number, 1872, pp. 427-436), finds my method of 
inquiry severely realistic, but my method of presentation, 



Author s Prefaces. xxvii 

unfortunately, German-dialectical. It says : " At first 
sight, if the iudinnent is based on the external form of 

C~) ' O CD 

the presentation of the subject, Marx is the most ideal 
of ideal philosophers, always in the German, i.e., the 
bad seiisa of the word. But in point of fact he is 
infinitely more realistic than all his fore-runners in the 
work of economic criticism. He can in no sense be 
called an idealist." I cannot answer the writer better 
than by aid of a few extracts from his own criticism, 
which may interest some of my readers to whom the 
Russian original is inaccessible. 

After a quotation from the preface to my " Criticism 
of Political Economy," Berlin, 1859, pp. 4-7, where I dis- 
cuss the materialistic basis of my method, the writer goes 
on : " The one thing which is of moment to Marx, is to 
find the law of the phenomena with whose investigation he 
is concerned ; and not only is that law of moment to him, 
which governs these phenomena, in so far as they have 
a definite form and mutual connection within a given 
historical period. Of still greater moment to him is 
the law of their variation, of their development, i.e., of 
their transition from one form into another, from one 
of connections into a different one. This law once 
discovered, he investigates in detail the effects in which 
it manifests itself in social life. Consequently, Marx 
only troubles himself about one thing; to show, by 
rigid scientific investigation, the necessity of successive 
determinate orders of social conditions, ami to establish, 
as impartially as possible, the facts that serve him for 
fundamental starting points. For ties it is quite enough, 
if ht: proves, at the same time, both the ne< j of 

the present order of things, and the necessity of an -ther 

order into which the first must inevitably pass over; 

and this all the same, whether men believe or do not 



xxviii Author s Prefaces. 

believe it, whether they are conscious or unconscious of 
it. Marx treats the social movement as a process 
of natural history, governed by laws not only indepen- 
dent of human will, consciousness and intelligence, but 
rather, on the contrary, determining that will, conscious- 
ness and intelligence. . . . If in the history of civilisa- 
tion the conscious element plays a part so subordinate, 
then it is self-evident that a critical inquiry whose sub- 
ject-matter is civilisation, can, less than anything else, 
have for its basis any form of, or any result of, conscious- 
ness. That is to say, that not the idea, but the 
material phenomenon alone can serve as its star tin g- 
point. Such an inquiry will confine itself to the con- 
frontation and the comparison of a fact, not with ideas, 
but with another fact. For this inquir}^, the one thing 
of moment is, that both facts be investigated as accur- 
ately as possible, and that they actually form, each with 
respect to the other, different momenta of an evolution ; 
but most important of all is the rigid analysis of the 
series of successions, of the sequences and concatenations 
in which the different stages of such an evolution pre- 
sent themselves. But it will be said, the general laws 
of economic life are one and the same, no matter 
whether they are applied to the present or the past. 
This Marx directly denies. According to him, such 
abstract laws do not exist. On the contrary, in his 
opinion every historical period has laws of its own. . . . 
As soon as society has outlived a given period of develop- 
ment and is passing over from one given stage to another, 
it begins to be subject also to other laws. In a word, 
economic life offers us a phenomenon analogous to the 
history of evolution in other branches of biology. The 
old economists misunderstood the nature of economic 
laws when they likened them to the laws of physics and 



Author s Prefaces, xxix 

chemistry. A more thorough analysis of phenomena 
shows that social organisms differ among themselves as 
fundamentally as plants or animals. Nay, one and the 
same phenomenon falls under quite different laws in 
consequence of the different structure of those organisms 
as a whole, of the variations of their individual organs, 
of the different conditions in which those organs function, 
&c. Marx, e.g., denies that the law of population is the 
same at all times and in all places. He asserts, on the 
contrary, that every stage of development has its own 
law of population. . . . With the varying degree of 
development of productive power, social conditions and 
the laws governing them vary too. Whilst Marx sets 
himself the task of following and explaining from this 
point of view the economic system established by the 
sway of capital, he is only formulating, in a strictly 
scientific manner, the aim that every accurate investiga- 
tion into economic life must have. The scientific value of 
such an inquiry lies in the disclosing of the special laws 
that regulate the origin, existence, development, death 
of a given social organism and its replacement by 
another and higher one. And it is this value that, in 
point of fact, Marx's book lias." 

Whilst the writer pictures what he takes to be 
actually my method, in this striking and [as far aa con- 
cerns my own application of it] generous way, what 
else is he picturing bu1 the dialectic method ? 

Of course the method of presentation must differ to form 
from that of inquiry. The latter has t<> appropriate 
the material in detail, to analyse its different forms 
development, t«> trace out their inner connection. Only 

nfter this work is done, can the actual movement !>«• 

adequately described. If this is done bu jcessfully, if 
the life of the subject-matter is ideally reflected as in a 



xxx Author s Prefaces. 

mirror, then it may appear as if we had before us a 
mere a priori construction. 

My dialectic method is not only different from the 
Hegeliam, but is its direct opposite. To Hegel, the 
life-process of the human brain, i.e., the process of 
thinking, which, under the name of ,l the Idea," he 
even transforms into an independent subject, is the 
demiurgos of the real world, and the real world is only 
the external, phenomenal form of " the Idea." With 
me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the 
material world reflected by the human mind, and trans- 
lated into forms of thought. 

The mystifying side of Hegelian dialectic I criticised 
nearly thirty years ago, at a time when it was still the 
fashion. But just as 1 was working at the first volume 
of " Das Kapital," it was the good pleasure of the 
peevish, arrogant, mediocre Emyovoi who now talk large 
in cultured Germany, to treat Hegel iii same way as 
the brave Moses Mendelssohn in Lessing's time treated 
Spinoza, i.e., as a " dead dog." I therefore openly 
avowed myself the pupil of that mighty thinker, and 
even here and there, in the chapter on the theory of value, 
coquetted with the modes of expression peculiar to him. 
The mystification which dialectic suffers in Hegel's hands, 
by no means prevents him from being the first to present 
its general form of working in a comprehensive and con- 
scious manner. With him it is standing on its head. It 
must be turned right side up again, if you would dis- 
cover the rational kernel within the mystical shell. 

In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in 
Germany, because it seemed to transfigure and to glorify 
the existing state of things. In its rational form it is a 
scandal and abomination to bour^eoisdom and its doc- 
trinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehen- 



Author s Prefaces.- xxxi 

sion and affirmative recognition of the existing state of 
things, at the same time also, the recognition of the 
negation of that state, of its inevitable breaking up ; 
because it regards every historically developed social form 
as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account 
its transient nature not less than its momentary exist- 
ence ; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in 
its essence critical and revolutionary. 

The contradictions inherent in the movement of 
capitalist society impress themselves upon the practical 
bourgeois most strikingly in the changes of the periodic 
cycle, through which modern industry runs, and whose 
crowning point is the universal crisis. That crisis is once 
again approaching, although as yet but in its preliminary 
stage ; and by the universality of its theatre and the 
intensity of its action it will drum dialectics even into 
the heads of the mushroom-upstarts of the new, holy 
Prusso- German empire. 

KARL MARX. 



London, January 24, 18 



< .>. 



BOOK I. 

CAPITALIST PRODUCTION. 



PART I. 
COMMODITIES AND MONEY. 



CHAPTER I. 

COMMODITIES. 

SECTION 1. — THE TWO FACTORS OF A COMMODITY \ USR-VALUE AND VALUE 
(THE SUBSTANCE OF VALUE AND THE MAGNITUDE OF VALUE). 

THE wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode 
of production prevails, presents itself as "an immense 
accumulation of commodities/' 1 its unit being a single com 
modity. Our investigation must therefore be^in with the 
analysis of a commodity. 

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a 
thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of80me sort 

or another. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, 

they Spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no diffei - 

1 Kuil Alar x Zur " Kritik <lcr PolitUoheD Ofkimo'irc." lVrlin, I860, p. 1. 

A 



2 Capitalist Production. 

cnce. 1 Neither are we here concerned to know how the object 
satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, 
or indirectly as means of production. 

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c, may he looked at 
from the two points of view of quality and quantity. It is 
an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be of 
use in various ways. To discover the various uses of things is 
the work of history 2 So also is the establishment of socially- 
recognised standards of measure for the quantities of these 
useful objects. The diversity of these measures has its origin 
partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, 
partly in convention. 

The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. 3 But this 
utility is not a thing of air. Being limited by the physical 
properties of the commodity, it has no existence apart from 
that commodity. A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a 
diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a material thing, a use- 
value, something useful. This property of a commodity is 
independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate 
its useful qualities. When treating of use-value, we always 
assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as dozens 
of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The use-values of 
commodities furnish the material for a special study, that 
of the commercial knowledge of commodities. 4 Use-values 
become a reality only by use or consumption : they also con- 

1 " Desire implies want ; it is the appetite of the mind, and as natural as hunger to 
the hody. . . . The greatest number (of things) have their value from supplying 
the wants of the mind." Nicolas Barbon : " A Discourse on coining the new money 
lighter, in answer to Mr. Locke's Considerations," &c. London, 1696. p. 2, 3. 

2 " Tilings have an intrinsick vertue " (this is Barbon's special terra for value in use) 
" which in all places have the same vertue ; as the loadstone to attract iron " (I.e., 
]>. G). The property which the magnet possesses of attracting iron, became of use 
only after by means of that property the polarity of the magnet had been discovered. 

3 " The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the necessities, 
or serve the conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, "Some considerations on 
the consequences of the lowering of interest, 1691," in Works Edit. Loud., 1777, 
Vol. II., p. 28.) In English writers of the 17th century we frequently find "worth " 
in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense of exchange value. This is 
quite in accordance with the spirit of a language that likes to use a Teutonic word 
for the actual thing, and a Romance word for its reflexion. 

4 In bourgeois societies the economical fictio juris prevails, that every one, as a 
buyer, possesses an encyclopaedic knowledge of commodities. 



Commodities. 3 

stitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may he the social 
form of that wealth. In the form of society we are about to 
consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of 
exchange value. 

Exchange value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative 
relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort 
are exchanged for those of another sort, 1 a relation constantly 
changing with time and place. Hence exchange value appears 
to be something accidental and purely relative, and conse- 
quently an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange value that is 
inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a 
contradiction in terms. 2 Let us consider the matter a little 
more closely. 

A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged 
for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c. — in short, for other com- 
modities in the most different proportions. Instead of one 
exchange value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many. But 
since x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c, each represent the 
exchange value of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, 
z gold, &c., must, as exchange values, be replaceable by each 
other, or equal to each other. Therefore, first : the valid 
exchange values of a given commodity express something 
equal ; secondly, exchange value, generally, is only the mode 
of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained 
in it, yet distinguishable from it. 

Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The pro- 
portions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those pro- 
portions may be, can always be represented by an equation in 
which a given quantity oi corn is equated to some quantity of 
iron: e.g. t 1 quarter com=x cwt. iron. What does this equa 
tion tell us 1 I fc tells us that in two different things — in 1 
quarter of corn and x ew t. of iron, there exists in equal quan- 
tities something common to both. The (wo things mustthere- 

1 h 1m valeur oonii ite dam le rapporl d'echan pe qui m trouve entre telle cho 
belle autre, entre I'll'' meiure d'une production, el telle ineeure d'une autre." (I.< 
a : De V int. im. Daire. Parie, L848 P 

Nothing cm have mi intrintiok value." (N. ion. mi, i.e., p. 6)j ' 

says — 

" The value "f ■ 1 1 
Is just as iniK ii .1 [I \n ill bring." 



4 Capitalist Production. 

fore be equal to a third, which in itself is neither the one nor 
the other. Each of them, so far as it is exchange value, must 
therefore be reducible to this third. 

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In 
order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, 
we decompose them into triangles. But the area of the tri- 
angle itself is expressed by something totally different from its 
visible figure, namely, by half the product of the base into 
the altitude. In the same way the exchange values of com- 
modities must be capable of being expressed in terms of some- 
thing common to them all, of which thing they represent a 
greater or less quantity. 

This common " something " cannot be either a geometrical, 
a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities. 
Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they 
affect the utility of those commodities, make them use-values. 
But the exchange of commodities is evidently an act character- 
ised by a total abstraction from use-value. Then one use- 
value is just as good as another, provided only it be present in 
sufficient quantity. Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of 
wares are as good as another, if the values be equal. There is 
no difference or distinction in things of equal value .... 
An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of as great value 
as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." 1 As use-values, 
commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as ex- 
change values they are merely different quantities, and conse- 
quently do not contain an atom of use-value. 

If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of com- 
modities, they have only one common property left, that of 
being products of labour. But even the product of labour 
itself has undergone a change in our hands. If we make 
abstraction from its u.se-value, we make abstraction at the 
^ame time from the material elements and shapes that make 
the product a use-value ; we see in it no longer a table, a house, 
yarn, or any other useful thing. Its existence as a mater al 
thing is put out of sight. Neither can it any longer be re- 
garded as the product of the labour of the joiner, the mason, 

i N. llarbon, 1. c. p. 53 and 7- 



Commodities. 5 

the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive 
labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products them- 
selves, we put out of sight both the useful character of the 
various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete 
forms of that labour; there is nothing left but what is common 
to them all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of 
labour, human labour in the abstract. 

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products ; 
it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere 
congelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power ex- 
pended without regard to the mode of its expenditure. All 
that these things now tell us is, that human labour-power has 
been expended in their production, that human labour is em- 
bodied in them. When looked at as crystals of this social 
substance, common to them all, they are — Values. 

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their 
exchange value manifests itself as something totally independ- 
ent of their use-value. But if we abstract from their use-value, 
there remains their Value as defined above. Therefore, the 
common substance that manifests itself in the exchange value 
of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. 
The progress of our investigation will show that exchange 
value is the only form in which the value of commodities can 
manifest Itself or be expressed. For the present, however, we 
have to consider the natuie of value independently of this, its 
form. 

A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because 
human Labour in the abstract has been embodied or material- 
ised in it. How. then, is the magnitude of this value t<> be 
measured ? Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating 
substance, the labour, contained in the article. The quantity 
of labour, however, is measured by it* duration, and Labour- 
time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours. 

Borne people might think that if the value of a commodity 
is determined by flu* quantity ol labour spent on if, the more 
idle and -unskilful fh<' labourer, the more valuable would his 
commodity l>e, because more tone would be required in its 
production. The labour, however, thai forma the Bubstance of 



6 Capitalist Production. 

value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform 
labour-power. The total labour-power of society, which is 
embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities pro- 
duced b}' that society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of 
human labour-power, composed though it be of innumerable 
individual units. Each of these units is the same as any other, 
so far as it has the character of the average labour-power of 
society, and takes effect as such ; that is, so far as it requires for 
producing a commodity, no more time than is needed on an 
average, no more than is socially necessary. The labour-time 
socially necessary is that required to produce an art : cle under 
the normal conditions of production, and with the average 
degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. The intro- 
duction of power looms into P^ngland probably reduced by one 
half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into 
cloth. The hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, continued 
to require the same time as before ; but for all that, the pro- 
duct of one hour of their labour represented after the change 
only half an hour's social labour, and consequently fell to one- 
half its former value. 

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of 
the value of any article is the amount of labour socially neces- 
sary, or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. 1 
Each individual commodity, in this connexion, is to be con- 
sidered as an average sample of its class. 2 Commodities, there- 
fore, in which equal quantities of labour are embodied, or 
which can be produced in the same time, have the same value 
The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the 
labour-time necessary for the production of the one is to that 
necessary for the production of the other. " As values, all com- 
modities are only definite masses of congealed labour-time." 3 

i "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged the one for 
another, is regulated by the quantity of labour necessarily required, and commonly 
taken in producing them." (Some Thoughts on the Interest of Money in general, and 
particularly in the Publick Funds, &c. Lond., p. 36.) This remarkable anon) mous 
work, written in the last century, bears no date. It is clear, however, from internal 
evidence, that it appeared in the reign of George II. about 1739 or 1740. 

- "Toutea lea productions d'un meme genre ne forment proprement qu'une masse. 
dont le prix se determine en general et sans 6gard aux circonstances particulates." 
(1.,- Trosne, t. c. p. 893.) * K. Marx. 1. c. p. G. 



Commodities. 7 

The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, 
if the labour-time required for its production also remained 
constant. But the latter changes with every variation in the 
productiveness of labour. This productiveness is determined 
by various circumstances, amongst others, by the average 
amount of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the 
degree of its practical application, the social organisation of 
production, the extent and capabilities of the means of pro- 
duction, and by physical conditions. For example, the 
same amount of labour in favourable seasons is embodied 
in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfavourable, only in four. 
The same labour extracts from rich mines more metal than 
from poor mines. Diamonds are of very rare occurrence on 
the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an aver- 
age, a great deal of labour-time. Consequently much labour 
is represented in a small compass. Jacob doubts whether gold 
has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still 
more to diamonds. According to Eschwege, the total produce 
of the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending 
in 1823, had not realised the price of one-and-a-half years' 
average produce of the sugar and coffee plantations of the 
same country, although the diamonds cost much more labour, 
and therefore represented more value. With richer mines, the 
same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, 
and their value would fall. If we could succeed at a small 
expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into diamonds, 
their value might fall below that of bricks. In general, the 
greater the productiveness of labour, the less is the labour-time 
required Tor the production of an article, the less is the amount 
of labour crystallised in that article, and the less is its value , 
and via " r d, fche less the productiveness of labour, the greater 
is the labour-time required for the production of an article, 
and the greater is its value. The value of a commodity, there- 
fore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the 
productiveness, <>f the labour incorporated in it. 

A thine can 1><- a u e-value. without having value. T 
the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour, 
Such are air, vir il, natural meadows, &c \ thing can 



8 Capitalist Production. 

l>o useful, and the product of human labour, without being a 
commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the 
produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not 
commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not only 
produce use-values, but use-values for others, social use-values. 
Lastly, nothing ran have value, without being an object of 
utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in 
it ; the labour does not count as labour, and therefore creates 
no value. 



SECTION 2. — THE TWOFOLD CHARACTER OF THE LABOUR EMBODIED I2n 

COMMODITIES. 

At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex 
of two things — use-value and exchange-value. Later on, we 
saw also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature ; 
for, so far as it finds expression in value, it does not possess the 
same characteristics that belong to it as a creator of use-values. 
I was the first to point out and to examine critically this two- 
fold nature of the labour contained in commodities. As this 
point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of political 
economy turns, we must go more into detail. 

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of 
Knen, and let the former be double the value of the latter, so 
that, if 10 yards of linen ==W, the coat=2\V 

The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its 
existence is the result of a special sort of productive activity, 
the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of opera- 
tion, subject, means, and result. The labour, whose utility is 
thus represented by the value in use of its product, or which 
manifests itself by making its product a use- value, we call 
useful labour. In this connexion we consider only its useful 
effect. 

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use- 
values, so also are the two forms of labour that produce them, 
tailoring and weaving. Were these two objects not quali- 
tatively different, not produced respectively by labour of 
different quality, thev could not stand to each other in the 



Commodities. 9 

relation of commodities. Coats are not exchanged for coats, 
one use- value is not exchanged for another of the same kind. 

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as 
many different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the 
order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the 
social division of labour. This division of labour is a necessary 
condition for the production of commodities, but it does not 
follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a 
necessary condition for the division of labour. In the primitive 
Indian community there is social division of labour, without 
production of commodities. Or, to take an example nearer 
home, in every factory the labour is divided according to a 
system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives 
mutually exchanging their individual products. Only such 
products can become commodities with regard to each other, as 
result from different kinds of labour, each kind being carried 
on independently and for the account of private individuals. 

To resume, then : In the use-value of each commodity there 
is contained useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite 
kind and exercised with a definite aim. Use-values cannot 
confront each other as commodities, unless the useful labour 
embodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. 
In a community, the produce of which in general takes the 
form of commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity pro- 
ducers, this qualitative difference between the useful forms of 
labour that are carried on independently by individual pro- 
ducers, each on their own account, develops into a complex 
system, a social division of labour. 

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn b} 7 the tailor or by his 
customer, in either case it operates as a use-value. Nor is the 
relation between the coat and the labour that produced it 
altered by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a 
special trade, an independent branch of the social division of 
labour. Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the 
human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a 
single man becoming a tailor. Hut coats and linen, like every 
other element of material wealth that is not tin 4 spontaneous 
produce <>f nature, must invariably owe their existence to a 



io Capitalist Production. 

special productive activity, exercised with a definite aim, an 
activity that appropriates particular nature-given materials to 
particular human wants. So far therefore as labour is a 
creator of use- value, is useful labour, it is a necessary con- 
dition, independent of all forms of society, for the existence of 
the human race ; it is an eternal nature-imposed necessity, 
without which there can be no material exchanges between 
man and Nature, and therefore no life. 

The use-values, coat, linen, &c, i.e., the bodies of commodi- 
ties, are combinations of two elements — matter and labour. 
If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a 
material substratum is always left, which is furnished by 
Nature without the help of man. The latter can work only 
as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter. 1 Nay 
more, in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped 
by natural forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only 
source of material wealth, of use- values produced by labour. 
As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the earth its 
mother. 

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use- 
value to the value of commodities. 

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the 
linen. But this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the 
present does not concern us. We bear in mind, however, that 
if the value of the coat is double that of 10 yds. of linen, 20 
yds. of linen must have the same value as one coat. So far 
as they are values, the coat and the linen are things of a like 
substance, objective expressions of essentially identical labour. 
But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of 

1 Tutti i fc omeni dell' universo, sicno essi prodotti della mano dell' uomo, ovvero 
delle universali leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale creazione, ma unica- 
mente di una modificazione della materia. Accostare e separare sono gli unici de- 
menti clie l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando L'idea della riproduzione : e tanto e ri- 
produzione di valore (value in use, although Verri in this passage of his controversy 
with the Physiocrats is not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking 
of) e di ricohezze Be la terra l'ariae l'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano, come so 
colla mano dell' uomo il glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni pez- 
zetti di metallo si organizzino a formare una ripetizione." — Pietro Verri. " Medita- 
zioni sulla Eeonomia Politica " [first printed in 1773] in (Justodi's edition of the 
Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. xv. p. 22. 



Commodities. 



1 1 



labour. There are, however, states of society in which one and 
the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in which 
ease these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the 
labour of the same individual, and not special and fixed func- 
tions of different persons ; just as the coat which our tailor 
makes one day, and the trousers which he makes another day, 
imply only a variation in the labour of one and the same indi- 
vidual. Moreover, we see at a glance that, in our capitalist 
society, a given portion of human labour is, in accordance with 
the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of tailor- 
ing, at another in the form of weaving. This change may 
possibly not take place without friction, but take place it must. 
Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, 
viz., the useful character of the labour, is nothing but the ex- 
penditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, 
though qualitatively different productive activities are each a 
productive expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, 
and in this sense are human labour. They are but two 
different modes of expending human labour-power. Of course, 
this labour-power, which remains the same under all its modi- 
fications, must have attained a certain pitch of development 
before it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes. But the 
value of a commodity represents human labour in the abstract, 
the expenditure of human labour in general. And just as in 
society, a general or a banker plays a great part, but mere 
man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, 1 so here with 
mere human labour. It is the expenditure of simple labour- 
power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on an average, apart 
from .'my special development, exists in the organism of every 
ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies 
in character in different countries and at different times, but 
in a particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only 
as simple labour intensified, or rather, as multiplied simp] ■ 
labour, a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a 
greater quantity of simple labour Experience shows that tin-. 
reduction is constantly being made, a commodity may be the 
product of the mo>t skilled labour, but its value, by equating 

1 el, Philwophii A i i; bti !'• rlin, 1840. P. 290 I LOO 



12 Capitalist Production. 

it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a 
definite quantity of the latter labour alone. 1 The different 
proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to 
unskilled labour as their standard, are established by a social 
process that goes on behind the backs of the producers, and, 
consequently, appear to be fixed by custom. For simplicity's 
sake we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be 
unskilled, simple labour ; by this we do no more than save 
ourselves the trouble of making the reduction. 

Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, 
we abstract from their different use-values, so it is with the 
labour represented by those values : we disregard the difference 
between its useful forms, weaving and tailoring. As the use- 
values, coat and linen, are combinations of special productive 
activities with cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, 
are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous congelations of 
indifferentiated labour, so the labour embodied in these latter 
values does not count by virtue of its productive relation to 
cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of human 
labour-power. Tailoring and weaving are necessary factors in 
the creation of the use- values, coat and linen, precisely because 
these two kinds of labour are of different qualities ; but only 
in so far as abstraction is made from their special qualities, 
only in so far as both possess the same quality of being human 
labour, do tailoring and weaving form the substance of the 
values of the same articles. 

Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values 
of definite magnitude, and according to cur assumption, the 
coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. Whence 
this difference in their values ? It is owing to the fact that 
the linen contains only half as much labour as the coat, 
and conseqently, that in the production of the latter, labour- 
power must have been expended during twice the time 
necessary for the production of the former. 

While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour con- 

1 The reader must note that we are not speaking here of the wnges or value that 
the labourer gets for a given labour time, but of the value of the commodity in which 
that labour time is materialised. Wages is a category that, as yet, has no existence 
at the present stage of our investigation. 



Commodities. 



T 1 



tained in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with refer- 
ence to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be 
reduced to human labour pure and simple. In the former 
case, it is a question of How and What, in the latter of How 
much ? How lomj a time ? Since the magnitude of the value of 
a commodity represents only the quantity of labour embodied 
in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain 
proportions, must be equal in value. 

If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful 
labour required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, 
the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with 
their number. If one coat represents x days' labour, two 
coats represent 2x days' labour, and so on. But assume that 
the duration of the labour necessary for the production of a 
coat becomes doubled or halved. In the first case, one coat is 
worth as much as two coats were before ; in the second case, 
two coats are only worth as much as one was before, although 
in both cases one coat renders the same service as before, and 
tin; useful labour embodied in it remains of the same quality. 
But the quantity of labour spent on its production has altered. 

An increase in the quantity of use- values is an increase of 
material wealth. With two coats two men can be clothed, 
with one coat only one man. Nevertheless, an increased 
quantity of ma f erial wealth may correspond to a simultaneous 
fall in the magnitude of its value. This antagonistic move- 
ment has its origin in the two-fold character of labour. 
Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of 
BOme useful concrete form; the eflicacy of any special produc- 
tive activity during a given time being dependent on its 
productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or 
less abundant, sourer of products, in proportion to the rise <>i 
fall of its productiveness. On the other hand, no change in this 

productiveness affects the labour represented by value. Since 
productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful forms 
of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that 
Labour, so soon as we make abstraction from those concrete 

Useful forms. However then productive power may vary, the 
same labour, exercise*! during equal periods ,.) time, alway 



14 Capitalist Production 

yields equal amounts of value. But it will yield, during equal 
periods of time, different quantities of values in use ; more, if 
the productive power rise, fewer, if it fall. The same change 
in productive power, which increases the fruitfulness of labour, 
and, in consequence, the quantity of use- values produced by 
that labour, will diminish the total value of this increased 
quantity of use-values, provided such change shorten the total 
labour-time necessary for their production ; and vice versa. 

On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an 
expenditure of human labour-power, and in its character of 
identical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value 
of commodities. On the other hand, all labour is the expendi- 
ture of human labour-power in a special form and with a 
definite aim, and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, 
it produces use-values. 1 

SECTION 3. — THE FORM OF VALUE OR EXCHANGE VALUE. 

Commodities come into the world in the shape of use- values, 
articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. This is their 

i In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real measure, by 
which at all times the value of all commodities can be estimated and compared, 
Adam Smith says, " Equal quantities of labour must at all times and in all places 
have the same value for the labourer. In his normal state of health, strength, and 
activity, and with the average degree of skill that he may possess, he must always 
give up the same portion of his rest, his freedom, and his happiness." (Wealth of 
Nations, b. I. ch. v.) On the one hand, Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) con- 
fuses the determination of value by means of the quantity of labour expended in the 
production of commodities, with the determination of the values of commodities by 
means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal quantities 
of labour have always the same value. On the other hand, he has a presentiment, 
that labour, so far as it manifests itself in the value of commodities, counts only as 
expenditure of labour power, but he treats this expenditure as the mere sacrifice of 
iest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the same time the normal activity of living 
beings. lint then, he has the modern wagedabourer in his eye. Much more aptly, 
the anonymous predecessor of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1 , p. (>, says "one man 
has employed himself a week in providing this necessary of life . . . and he that 
gives him some other in exchange, cannot make a better estimate of what is a pro- 
per equivalent, than by computing what cost him just as much labour and time : 
which in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing for a time 
certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." (1. c. p. 30.) 
[The English language has the advantage of possessing different words for the two 
aspects of labour here considered. The labour which creates Use-Value, and counts 
qualitatively, is Work, as distinguished from Labour ; that which creates Value and 
counts quantitatively, is Labour as distinguished from Work. ED.] 



Commodities. 1 5 

plain, homely, bodily form. They are, however, commodities, 
only because they are something twofold, both objects of utility, 
and, at the same time, depositories of value. They manifest 
themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of com- 
modities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical 
or natural form, and a value form. 

The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect 
from Dame Quickly, that we don't know " where to have it." 
The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse mate- 
rialitv of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into its 
composition. Turn and examine a single commodity, by itself, 
as we will. Yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it 
seems impossible to grasp it. If, however, we bear in mind that 
the value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that 
they acquire this reality only in so far as they are expressions 
or embodiments of one identical social substance, viz., human 
labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can only 
manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to com- 
modity. In fact we started from exchange value, or the 
exchange relation of commodities, in order to get at the value 
that Lies hidden behind it. We must now return to this form 
under which value first appeared to us. 

Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities 
have a value form common to them all, and presenting a 
marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their u - 
\;ilu<->. I mean their money form. Here, however, a task is set 
us, the performance of which has never yet even been attempted 
by bourgeois economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this 
money form, of developing the expression <>i" value implied in 
the value relation of commodities, from its simplest, almo I 
imperceptible outline, t" the dazzling money form. By doing 
this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented by 

money. 

The simplest value relation is evidently thai of one com- 
modity to boi ne other commodity of a different kind. 

Hence the relation between the values of two commoditie sup- 
plies us with the .simplest expression of the value of a single 
commodity. 



1 6 Capitalist Production. 

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value, 

x commodity A = y commodity B, or 
x commodity A is worth y commodity B. 

20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 

20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat. 

1. TJie two poles of the expression of value : Relative fo) % m and 

Equivalent form. 

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in 
this elementary form. Its analysis, therefore, is our real 
difficulty. 

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example 
the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts. 
The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the 
material in which that value is expressed. The former plays 
an active, the latter a passive, part. The value of the linen is 
represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. 
The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in equivalent 
form. 

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately 
connected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the 
expression of value ; but, at the same time, are mutually 
exclusive, antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same 
expression. They are allotted respectively to the two different 
commodities brought into relation by that expression. It is 
not possible to express the value of linen in linen. 20 yards 
of linen = 20 yards of linen is no expression of value. On the 
contrary, such an equation merely says that 20 yards of linen 
are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a definite quantity of 
the use-value linen. The value of the linen can therefore be 
expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other commodity. The 
relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, therefore, 
the presence of some other commodity — here the coat — under 
the form of an equivalent. On the other hand, the commodity 
that figures as the equivalent cannot at the same time assume 
the relative form. That second commodity is not the one 
whose value is expressed. Its function is merely to serve as 



Commodities, 1 7 

the material in which the value of the first commodity is 
expressed. 

No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen == 1 coat, or 20 
yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation : 1 
coat = 20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. 
But, in that case, I must reverse the equation, in order to 
express the value of the coat relatively ; and, so soon as I do 
that, the linen becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. 
A single commodity cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, 
in the same expression of value, both forms. The very 
polarity of these forms makes them mutually exclusive. 

Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or 
the opposite equivalent form, depends entirely upon its acci- 
dental position in the expression of value — that is, upon 
whether it is the commodity whose value is being expressed or 
the commodity in which value is being expressed. 

2. The Relative form, of value. 
(a.) The nature and import of this form. 

In order to discover how the elementary expression of the 
value of a commodity lies hidden in the value relation of two 
commodities, we must, in the first place, consider the latter 
entirely apart from its quantitative aspect. The usual mode of 
procedure is generally the reverse, and in the value relation 
nothing is seen but the proportion between definite quantities 
of two different sorts of commodities that are considered equal 
to each other. It is apt to be forgotten that the magnitudes 
of different things can be compared quantitatively, only when 
those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit. It 
is only as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same 
denomination, and therefore commensurable. 1 

Whether 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 20 coats or = x 

1 The few economists, amongst whom is S. Bailey, who have occupied themselves 
with the analysis of the form of value, have hcen unable to arrive at any result, first, 
because they confuse the form of value with value itself ; and second, because, under 
the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, they exclusively give their attention to 
the quantitative aspect of the question. " The command of quantity . . . 
constitutes value." (" Money and its Vicissitudes." Loudon, 1837. p. 11. Bj 
liailey.) 

■ 



iS Capitalist Production. 

coats — that is, whether a given quantity of linen is worth few 
or many coats, every such statement implies that the linen and 
coats, as magnitudes of value, are expressions of the same unit, 
things of the same kind. Linen = coat is the basis of the 
equation. 

But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus 
assumed, do not play the same part. It is only the value of 
the linen that is expressed. And how ? By its reference to 
the coat as its equivalent, as something that can be exchanged 
for it. In this relation the coat is the mode of existence of 
value, is value embodied, for only as such is it the same as the 
linen. On the other hand, the linen's own value comes to the 
front, receives independent expression, for it is only as being 
value that it is comparable with the coat as a thing of equal 
value, or exchangeable with the coat. To borrow an illustra- 
tion from chemistry, butyric acid is a different substance from 
propyl formate. Yet both are made up of the same chemical 
substances, carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), and 
that, too, in like proportions — namely, C 4 H 8 2 . If now we 
equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first place, 
propyl formate would be, in this relation, merely a form of 
existence of C 4 H 8 2 ; and in the second place, we should be 
stating that butyric acid also consists of C 4 H 8 2 . Therefore, 
by thus equating the two substances, expression would be given 
to their chemical composition, while their different physical 
forms would be neglected 

If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations 
of human labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, to 
the abstraction, value ; but we ascribe to this value no form 
apart from their bodily form. It is otherwise in the value 
relation of one commodity to another. Here, the one stands 
forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to the 
other. 

By making tho. coat the equivalent cf the linen, we equate 
the labour embodied in the former to that in the latter. Now, 
it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete 
labour of a different sort from the weaving which makes the 
linen. But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the 



Commodities. 1 9 

tailoring to that which is really equal in the two kinds of 
labour, to their common character of human labour. In this 
roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, 
in so far as it weaves value, has nothing to distinguish it from 
tailoring, and, consequently, is abstract human labour. It is 
the expression of equivalence between different sorts of com- 
modities that alone brings into relief the specific character of 
value -creating labour, and this it does by actually reducing 
the different varieties of labour embodied in the different 
kinds of commodities to their common quality of human labour 
in the abstract. 1 

There, is, however, something else required beyond the 
expression of the specific character of the labour of which the 
value of the linen consists. Human labour-power in motion, 
or human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. It 
becomes value only in its congealed state, when embodied in 
the form of some object. In order to express the value of the 
linen as a congelation of human labour, that value must be 
expressed as having objective existence, as being a something 
materially different from the linen itself, and yet a something 
common to the linen and all other commodities. The problem 
is already solved. 

When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation 
of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, 
as something of the same kind, because it is value. In this posi- 
tion it is a thing in which we see nothing but value, or whose 
palpable bodily form represents value. Yet the coat itself, the 
body of the commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. A coat as 

BUch no more tells us it is value, than docs the first piece of 
linen we take hold of. This shows that when placed in value 

1 Tin- c( l< ibrafc 'l Franklin, one of the first econ om ists, after Wm, Petty, who ww 
through the nature of value, lays: "Trade in general being nothing <!-'■ but the 
ingc <>f labour for labour, the value of .-ill thingi is ... . most justly 
meaeured i>y labour.* (The works of B. Franklin, Jfce., edited by Sparks, B 

Vol. 11., ji. 267.) Franklin i« unoonsoioue tint by estimating the value of 
everything in labour, he makes abetraotioii from any differeuoe in the eorte «>f laboui 
excha n ged, ami thui reduces them all to equal human labour. But alth< 
ignorant of this, yet he says ii Efe spseflca first of u the one labour," then of "the 
other labour, M and finally of " labour, " without further qualification, as th.- tnbstancs 
of tlic value of everything. 



20 Capitalist Production. 

relation to the linen, the coat signifies more than when out of 
that relation, just as many a man strutting about in a gorgeous 
uniform counts for more than when in mufti. 

In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the 
shape of tailoring, must have been actually expended. Human 
labour is therefore accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is 
a depository of value, but though worn to a thread, it does not 
let this fact show through. And as equivalent of the linen in 
the value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts 
therefore as embodied value, as a body that is value. A, for 
instance, cannot be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same 
time majesty in B's eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, 
what is more, with every new father of the people, changes its 
features, hair, and many other things besides. 

Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equiva- 
lent of the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. The 
value of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of 
the commodity coat, the value of one by the use-value of the 
other. As a use- value, the linen is something palpably dif- 
ferent from the coat ;. as value, it is the same as the coat, and 
now has the appearance of a coat. Thus the linen acquires 
a value form different from its physical form. The fact that it 
is value, is made manifest by its equality with the coat, just as 
the sheep's nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance 
to the Lamb of God. 

We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commo- 
dities has already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon 
as it comes into communication with another commodity, the 
coat. Only it betrays its thoughts in that language with 
which alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. In 
order to tell us that its own value is created by labour in its 
abstract character of human labour, it sa} T s that the coat, in so 
far as it is worth as much as the linen, and therefore is value, 
consists of the same labour as the linen. In order to inform 
us that its sublime reality as value is not the same as its buck- 
ram body, it says that value has the appearance of a coat, and 
consequently that so far as the linen is value, it and the coat 
are as like as two peas. We may here remark, that the Ian- 



Commodities. 2 1 

guage of commodities has, besides Hebrew, many other more or 
less correct dialects. The German u werthsein," to be worth, 
for instance, expresses in a less striking manner than the 
Romance verbs " valere," " valer," u valoir," that the equating of 
commodity B to commodity A, is commodity A's own. mode of 
expressing its value. Paris vaut bien une messe. 

By means, therefore, of the value relation expressed in our 
equation, the bodily form of commodity B becomes the value 
form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a 
mirror to the value of commodity A. 1 By putting itself in re- 
lation with commodity B, as value in propria persond, as the 
matter of which human labour is made up, the commodity A 
converts the value in use, B, into the substance in which to 
express its, A's, own value. The value of A, thus expressed in 
the use-value of B, has taken the form of relative value. 

(b.) Quantitative determination of Relative value. 

Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a 
useful object of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 
lbs. of coffee. And a given quantity of any commodity con- 
tains a definite quantity of human labour. The value-form 
must therefore not only express vakie generally, but also value 
in definite quantity. Therefore, in the value relation of com- 
modity A to commodity B, of the linen to the coat, not only is 
the lattur, as value in general, made the equal in quality of the 
linen, but a definite quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the 
equivalent of a definite quantity (20 yards) of linen. 

The equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen 
are worth one coat, implies that the same quantity of value- 
substance (congealed labour) is embodied in both ; that the 
two commodities have each cost the same amount of labour or 
the same quantity of labour time. But the labour time 
necessary for the production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat 

1 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Since he comes into the 
world neither with a looking glass in his hand, nor as a lichtian philosopher, to whom 
" I am I " is sufficient, man first sees and recognises himself in Other men. Peter only 
estahlislics his own identity as a man by first comparing himself with Pan] as being 
of like kind. And thereby Paul, just as he stands in his Pauline personality, be 
«:omes to Peter the type of the genus homo. 



22 Capitalist Production. 

varies with every change in the productiveness of weaving or 
tailoring. We have now to consider the influence of such 
changes on the quantitative aspect of the relative expression of 
value. 

I. Let the value of the linen vary, 1 that of the coat remaining 
constant. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax- 
growing soil, the labour time necessary for the production of 
the linen be doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. 
Instead of the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, we should 
have 20 yards of Jinen =: 2 coats, since 1 coat would now con- 
tain only half the labour time embodied in 20 yards of linen. 
If, on the other hand, in consequence, say, of improved looms, 
this labour time be reduced by one half, the value of the linen 
would fall by one half. Consequently, we should have 20 
yards of linen = \ coat. The relative value of commodity A, 
i.e. t its value expressed in commodity B, rises and falls directly 
as the value of A, the value of B being supposed constant. 

II. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the 
value of the coat varies. If, under these circumstances, in 
consequence, for instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour 
time necessary for the production of a coat becomes doubled, 
we have instead of 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, 20 yards of linen 
= J coat. If, on the other hand, the value of the coat sinks 
by one half, then 20 yards of linen = 2 coats. Hence, ii the 
value of commodity A remain constant, its relative value ex- 
pressed in commodity B rises and falls inversely as the value 
of B. 

If we compare the different cases in I. and II., we see that 
the same change of magnitude in relative value may arise from 
totally opposite causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen 
= 1 coat, becomes 20 yards of linen =■ 2 coats, either, because, 
the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the 
coat has fallen by one half ; and it becomes 20 yards of linen 
=. \ coat, either, because the value of the linen has fallen by 
one half, or because the value of the coat has doubled. 

III. Let the quantities of labour time respectively neces- 

l Value is here, as occasionally in the preceding pages, used in the sense of value 
determined as to quantity, or of magnitude of value. 



Commodities. ?3 

sary for the production of the linen and the coat vary sim- 
ultaneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. 
In this case 20 yards of linen continue equal to 1 coat, however 
much their values may have altered. Their change of value is 
aeen as soon as they are compared with a third commodity, 
whose value has remained constant. If the values of all com- 
modities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, 
their relative values would remain unaltered. Their real 
change of value would appear from the diminished or increased 
quantity of commodities produced in a given time. 

IV. The labour time respectively necessary for the produc- 
tion of the linen and the coat, and therefore the value of these 
commodities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, 
but at unequal rates, or in opposite directions, or in other 
ways. The effect of all these possible different variations, on 
the relative value of a commodity, may be deduced from the 
results of I., II., and III. 

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither 
unequivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative 
expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude 
of relative value. The relative value of a commodity may 
varv, although its value remains constant. Its relative value 
may remain constant, although its value varies; and finally, 
simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that 
of its relative expression by no means necessarily correspond 
in amount. ' 

1 This incongruity between the magnitude of value and its relative expression has, 
with customary ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar economists. For example— 
*'Once admit that A falls, because B, with which it is exchanged, rist s, while no 1' H 
labour is bestowed in the meantime on A, and your general principle of value falls to 
the ground. . . . If he [liicanlo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to 
1$, Ji falls in value relatively to A, ho cutaway tin: ground on which be rested his 
grand proposition, that the value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour 

embodied In it ; for If e dungs in the eoet of A .• 1 1 1 ■ n not only its own value In 

tion to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of II relatively to that of A, 
though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to produce II, then not 
only the doctrine falls to the ground which MOertl that the quantity of labour 

bestowed on an nrtiels regulntes its value, but also that which eflrras the cost of m 

Article to regulate its value." (J. llroa lhurst: l'olitical Economy, Ixmdon, 1842, p. 11 
And 11.) 

Mr. 1'roadhurst might just as well say: consider the fractions JJ, | Ac., 

tho number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, its magnitude 



24 Capitalist Production. 

3. The Equivalent form of value. 

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing 
its value in the use-value of a commodity differing in kind 
(the coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific 
form of value, namely that of the equivalent. The commodity 
linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that 
the coat, without having assumed a value form different from 
its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The fact that the 
latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the 
coat is directly exchangeable with it. Therefore, when we say 
that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the 
fact that it is directly exchangeable with other coran odities. 

When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent 
of another, such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the 
characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with 
linen, we are far from knowing in what proportion the two are 
exchangeable. The value of the linen being given in magni- 
tude, that proportion depends on the value of the coat. 
Whether the coat serves as the equivalent and the linen as 
relative value, or the linen as the equivalent and the coat as 
relative value, the magnitude of the coat's value is determined, 
independently of its value form, by the labour time necessary 
for its production. But whenever the coat assumes in the 
equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value acquires 
no quantitative expression ; on the contrary, the commodity 
coat now figures only as a definite quantity of some article. 

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what ? 2 coats. 
Because the commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, 
because the use-value <.< a., as opposed to the linen, figures as 
an embodiment of value, therefore a definite number of coats 
suffices to express the definite quantity of value in the linen. 
Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 
yards of linen, but they can never express the quantity of their 
own value. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that 

relatively to the numbers 20, 50, 100, &c, continually diminishes. Therefore the 
great principle that the magnitude of a whole number, Mich as 10, is "regulated" by 
the number of times unity is contained in it, falls to the ground. — [The author ex- 
plains in section 4 of this chapter, p. 52, note 2, what he understands by "Vulgar 
Economy.'' — Ed.] 



Commodities. 25 

in the equation of value, the equivalent figures exclusively as 
a simple quantity of some article, of some use-value, has misled 
Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into 
seeing, in the expression of value, merely a quantitative relation. 
The truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, 
no quantitative determination of its value is expressed. 

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form 
of the equivalent, is this : use-value becomes the form of mani- 
festation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value. 

The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value form. 
But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists in the case of any 
commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into 
a value relation with it, and then only within the limits of this 
relation. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of 
equivalent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into 
the expression of its own value, every commodity is compelled 
to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept 
the use-value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other 
commodity as the form of its own value. 

One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material 
substances, as use-values, will serve to illustrate this point. A 
sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: 
but we can neither see nor touch this weight. We then take 
various pieces of iron, whose Aveight bus been determined 
beforehand. The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifes- 
tation of weight, than is the sugar- loaf. Nevertheless, in order 
to express the BUgar-loaf as so much weight, we put it into a 
weight-relation with the iron. In this relation, the iron 
officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. A certain 
quantity of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight 
of the sugar, and represents, in relation to the BUgar-loaf, 
•reight embodied, the form of manifestation of weight. Thi.u 

part is played by the iron only within this relation, into which 

th • Bugar or any other body, w hose weight has to be d< termined, 

eaten with the iron. Were they not both heavy, they could 

not enter int<> this relation, and tin one could therefore not 
serve as tie expression of the weight of the other. When we 

throw b«»lh into the .scales, we see in reality, that as weight 



26 Capitalist Production. 

they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in 
proper proportions, they have the same weight. Just as the 
substance iron, as a measure of weight, represents in relation 
to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, in our expression of value, 
the material object, coat, in relation to the linen, represents 
value alone. 

Here, however, the analogy ceases. The iron, in the ex- 
pression of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents a natural pro- 
perty common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, 
in the expression of value of the linen, represents a non-natural 
property of both, something purely social, namely, their value. 

Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, 
for example — expresses the value of that commodity, as being 
something wholly different from its substance and properties, 
as being, for instance, coat-like, we see that this expression 
itself indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of 
it. With the equivalent form it is just the contrary. The very 
essence of this form is that the material commodity itself — the 
coat — just as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the 
form of value by Nature itself. Of course this holds good only 
so long as the value relation exists, in which the coat stands in 
the position of equivalent to the linen. 1 Since, however, the 
properties of a thing are not the result of its relations to other 
things, but only manifest themselves in such relations, the 
coat seems to be endowed with its equivalent form, its property 
of being directly exchangeable, just as much by Nature as it is 
endowed with the property of being heavy, or the capacity to 
keep us warm. Hence the enigmatical character of the equiva- 
lent form which escapes the notice of the bourgeois political 
economist, until this form, completely developed, confronts him 
in the shape of money. He then seeks to explain away the 
mystical character of gold and silver, by substituting for them 
less dazzling commodities, and by reciting, with ever renewed 
satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible commodities which at 
one time or another have played the part of equivalent. He has 

1 Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex-categories, form a 
very curious class. For instance, one man is king only because other men stand in 
the relation of subjects to him. They, on the contrary, imagine that they are sub- 
jects because he is king. 



Commodities. 2 7 

not the least suspicion that the most simple expression of value, 
such as 20 yds. of Jinen = 1 coat, already propounds the riddle 
of the equivalent form for our solution. 

The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, 
figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, 
and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful 
concrete labour. This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the 
medium for expressing abstract human labour. If on the 
one hand the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of 
abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the tailoring 
which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the 
form under which that abstract labour is realised. In the ex- 
pression of value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring con- 
sists, not in making clothes, but in making an object, which we 
at once recoimise to be Value, and therefore to be a congelation 
of labour, but of labour indistinguishable from that realised in 
the value of the linen. Tn order to act as such a mirror of 
value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its 
own abstract quality of being human labour generally. 

In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is 
expended. Both, therefore, possess the general property of 
being human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such 
as in the production of value, have to be considered under 
this aspect alone. There is nothing mysterious in this. But 
in the expression of value there is a complete turn of the 
tables. For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that 
weaving creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being 
weaving, as such, but by reason of its general property of being 
human labour? Simply by opposing to weaving that other 
particular form of concrete labour (in this instance tailoring), 
which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving. 
Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct expression 
of value, so now does tailoring; a concrete lorni of labour, 
appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour 
generally. 

Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that 
concrete labour becomes the form under which its opposite, 

abstract human labour, manifests itself 



28 Capitalist Production. 

But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks 
as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human 
labour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, 
and therefore with that embodied in the linen. Consequently, 
although, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the 
labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as 
labour direct^ social in its character. This is the reason why 
it results in a product directly exchangeable with other com- 
modities. We have then a third peculiarity of the Equivalent 
form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the 
form of its opposite, labour directly social in its form. 

The two latter peculiarities of the Equivalent form will 
become more intelligible if we go back to the great thinker 
who was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of 
thought, society, or nature, and amongst them also the form of 
value. I mean AristoHe. 

In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money form 
of commodities is only the further development of the simple 
form of value — i.e., of the expression of the value of one com- 
modity in some other commodity taken at random ; for he says — 
5 beds = 1 house (a;»« «■<»« itri «'*/«;) is not to be 

distinguished from 
5 beds = so much money. 

(xkiveu Tivrt dvri . . . crav al Tim x'k'na.t) 

He further sees that the value relation which gives rise to 
this expression makes it necessary that the house should quali- 
tatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such 
an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be 
compared witli each other as commensurable quantities, " Ex- 
change," he says, "cannot take pla^e without equality, and 
^quality not without commensurability " (our Mm ^ oSa-t,? 
rvufttrfi*;). Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives 
up the further analysis of the form of value. "It is, 
however, in reality, impossible (r« pit oZr iknitif H^xto*), that 
such unlike things can be commensurable " — i.e., qualita- 
tively equal. Such an equalisation can only be something 
foreign to their real nature, consequently only "a make-shift 
for practical purposes." 



Commodities. 29 

Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to 
his further analysis ; it was the absence of any concept of 
value. What is that equal something, that common substance, 
which admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a 
house ? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle, 
And why not ? Compared with the beds, the house does re- 
present something equal to them, in so far as it represents what 
is really equal, both in the beds and the house. And that is — 
human labour. 

There was, however, an important fact which prevented 
Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to commodities, is 
merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, 
and consequently as labour of equal quality. Greek society 
was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural 
basis, the inequality of men and of their labour powers. The 
secret of the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of 
labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they 
are human labour in general, cannot be deciphered, until the 
notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a 
popular prejudice. This, however, is possible only in a society 
in which the great mass of the produce of labour takes the form 
of commodities, in which, consequently, the dominant relation 
between man and man, is that of owners of commodities. The 
brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he 
discovered, in the expression of the value of commodities, a 
relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the society in 
which be lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, 
" in truth," was at the bottom of this equality. 

4. The Elementary form 0/ value consult' red as a whole. 

The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained 
in the equation, expressing its value relation to another com- 
modity of a different kind, or in its exchange relation to the 
same The value of commodity A, is qualitatively 1 ^pressed, 
by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it. 

Us value is quantitatively expressed by the fart, that ■ definite 

quantity <>f B is exchangeable with a definite quantity 1 
In other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent 



30 Capitalist Production. 

and definite expression, by taking the form of exchange value. 
When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in common 
parlance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an ex- 
change value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. A com- 
modity is a use-value or object of utility, and a value. It 
manifests itself as this two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its 
value assumes an independent form — viz., the form of exchange 
value. It never assumes this form when isolated, but onlv 
when placed in a value or exchange relation with another 
commodity of a different kind. When once we know this, 
such a mode of expression does no harm ; it simply serves as 
an abbreviation. 

Our anal}-sis has shown, that the form or expression of the 
value of a commodity originates in the nature of value, and 
not that val-ie and its magnitude originate in the mode of 
their expression as exchange value. This, however, is the 
delusion as well of the mercantilists and their recent revivors, 
Ferrier, Ganilh, 1 and others, as also of their antipodes, the 
modern barmen of Free Trade, such as Bastiat. The mercan- 
tilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the 
expression of value, and consequently on the equivalent form 
of commodities, which attains its full perfection in money. 
The modern hawkers of Free Trade, who must get rid of their 
article at any price, on the other hand, lay most stress on the 
quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. For them 
there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of 
value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the 
exchange relation of commodities, that is, in the dairy list of 
prices current. MacLeod, who has taken upon himself to 
dress up the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most 
learned finery, is a successful cross between the superstitious 
mercantilists, and the enlightened Free Trade barmen. 

A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms 
of B, contained in the equation expressing the value relation of 
A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form 

1 F. L. A. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, " Du gouvernement consider^ dans 
sc8 rapports avoc le commerce," Paris, 1805; and Charles Ganilh, " Des Systemes 
d'Economie politique," 2nd ed., Faris, 1821. 



Commodities. 3 1 

of A figures only as a use-value, the bodily form of B only as 
the form or aspect of value. The opposition or contrast 
existing internally in each commodity between use-value and 
value, is, therefore, made evident externally by two com- 
modities being placed in such relation to each other, that the 
commodity whose value it is sought to express, figures directly 
as a mere use-value, while the commodity in which that value 
is to be expressed, figures directly as mere exchange value. 
Hence the elementary form of value of a commodity is the 
elementary form in which the contrast contained in that 
commodity, between use-value and value, becomes apparent. 

Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use- 
value ; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's 
development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., 
at the epoch when the labour spent on the production of a 
useful article becomes expressed as one of the objective 
qualities of that article, i.e., as its value. Jt therefore follows 
that the elementary value-form is also the primitive form 
under which a product of labour appears historically as a 
commodity, and that the gradual transformation of such 
products into commodities, proceeds pari passu with the 
development of the value form. 

We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary 
form of value : it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series 
of metamorphoses before it can ripen into the Price-form. 

The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any 
other commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the 
lise-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of 
exchange with a single different commodity, Bj but it is still 
far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative 
proportionality, to ;ill commodities. To the elementary relative 
value-form of a commodity, there corresponds the single equi- 
valent form of one other Commodity. Thus, in the relative 
expression of value of the linen, the COat ;issiinies the form of 

equivalent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation 
to a single commodity, t he linen. 
Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an < 

transition into a more Complete form. It iii true that by means 



2,2 Capitalist Production. 

of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes 
expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity 
But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn j 
or anything else. Therefore, according as A is placed in rela- 
tion with one or the other, we get for one and the same com- 
modity, different elementary expressions of value. 1 The number 
of such possible expressions is limited only by the number of 
the different kinds of commodities distinct from it. The 
isolated expression of A's value, is therefore convertible into a 
series, prolonged to any length, of the different elementary ex- 
pressions of that value. 

B. Total or Expanded form of value. 

z Com. A=u Com. B or=v Com. C or=w Com. D or=x Com. 

E or=&c. 

(20 yards of linen=l coat or=10 lb tea or=40 lb coffee or= 

1 quarter corn or=2 ounces gold ov=\ ton iron or=&c.) 

1. The Expanded Relative form of value. 

The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is 
now expressed in terms of numberless other elements of the 
world of commodities. Every other commodity now becomes 
a mirror of the linen's value. 2 It is thus, that for the first time, 

} In Homer, for instance, the value of an article is expressed in a series of different 
things. II. VII. 472-475. 

2 For this reason, we can speak of the coat-value of the linen when its value is ex- 
pressed in coats, or of its corn-value when expressed in corn, and so on. Every such 
expression tells us, that what appears in the use-values, coat, corn, &c, is the value 
of the linen. " The value of any commodity denoting its relation in exchange, we 
may speak of it as . . . corn-value, cloth-value, according to the commodity with 
which it is compared ; and hence there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many 
kinds of value as there are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and 
equally nominal." (A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measure and Causes of 
Value : chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr. Ricardo and his followers. By the 
author of "Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions." London, 1825, p. 30). S. 
Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its day created much 
ithr in England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the various relative expressions of 
one and the same value, he had proved the impossibility of any determination of the 
concept of value. However narrow his own views may have been, yet, that he laid 
his finger on some serious defects in the Kicardian Theory, is proved by the animosity 
with which he was attacked by Ricardo's followers. See the Westminster Review for 
example. 



Commodities. ^2> 

this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of un- 
differentiated human labour. For the labour that creates it, 
now stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally 
with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its 
form, whether tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c., and no matter, 
therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. 
The linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a 
social relation, no longer with only one other kind of com- 
modity, but with the whole world of commodities. As a 
commodity, it is a citizen of that world. At the sa*me time, 
the interminable series of value equations implies, that as re- 
gards the value of a commodity, it is a matter of in- 
difference under what particular form, or kind, of use-value it 
appears. 

In the first form, 20 yds. of linen =1 coat, it might, for ought 
that otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two com- 
modities are exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second 
form, on the contrary, we perceive at once the background that 
determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental 
appearance. The value of the linen remains unaltered in mag- 
nitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in num- 
berless different commodities, the property of as many 
different owners. The accidental relation between two in- 
dividual commodity-owners disappears. It becomes plain, that 
it is not the exchange of commodities which regulates the 
magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the 
magnitude of their value which controls their exchange 
proportions. 

2. The particular Equivalent form. 

p]ach commodity, such as coat, tea, corn, iron, &c., figures in 
the expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, con- 
sequently, as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each 
of these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent 
form, one out of many. In the same way the manifold concrete 
usdul kinds of labour, embodied in these different oommodil ie . 
rank now as so many different forms of the realisation! or mani- 
festation, of undifferentiated human labour. 

c 



34 Capitalist Production. 

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value. 

In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete 
because the series representing it is interminable. The chain 
of which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any 
moment to be lengthened by each new kind of commodity that 
comes into existence and furnishes the material for a fresh 
expression of value. In the second place, it is a many- 
coloured mosaic of disparate and independent expressions 
of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative value 
of each commodity in turn, becomes expressed in this ex- 
panded form, we get for each of them a relative value-form, 
different in every case, and consisting of an interminable 
series of expressions of value. The defects of the expanded 
relatives alue form are reflected in the corresponding equiva- 
lent form. Since the bodily form of each single commodity is 
one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others, we 
have, on the whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, 
each excluding the others. In the same way, also, the special, 
concrete, useful kind of labour embodied in each particular 
equivalent, is presented only as a particular kind of labour, 
and therefore not as an exhaustive representative of human 
labour generally. The latter, indeed, gains adequate manifes- 
tation in the totality of its manifold, particular, concrete forms. 
But, in that case, its expression in an infinite series is ever 
incomplete and deficient in unity. 

The expanded relative value-form is, however, nothing but 
the sum of the elementary relative expressions or equations of 
the first kind, such as 

20 yards of linen = 1 coat 
20 yards of linen = 10 lbs. of tea, etc. 
Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation, 
1 coat z= 20 yards of linen 
10 lbs. of tea = 20 yards of linen, etc. 
In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other 
commodities, and thus expresses its value in a series of other 
commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of 
the latter exchange them for the linen, and consequently express 



Commodities, 35 

the value of their various commodities in one and the same 
third commodity, the linen. If then, we reverse the series, 20 
yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs. of tea, etc., that is to say, 
if we give expression to the converse relation already implied 
in the series, we get, 

C. The General form of value. 
1 coat 

10 lbs. of tea 
40 lbs. of coffee 

1 quarter of corn )> = 20 yards of linen 

2 ounces of gold 
i a ton of iron 
x com. A., etc. 

1. The altered character of the form of value. 

All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary 
form, because in a single commodity; (2) with unity, because in 
one and the same commodity. This form of value is elementary 
and the same for all, therefore general. 

The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a 
commodity as something distinct from its use- value or material 
form. 

The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following : — 
! coat = 20 yards of linen, 10 lbs. of tea =. \ ton of iron. 
The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to 
iron. But to be equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as 
different as are Linen and iron. This form, it is plain, occurs 
practically only in the first beginning, when the products of 
labour are converted into commodities by accidental and 
occasiona] exchange 

The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner 
than the firsts the value of a commodity from its use-value; for 
the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all 
possible shapes with the bodily form of the coat ; it is equated 
to linen, to iron, t<> tea, in .short, to everything else, only nol to 
itself, the coat. On the other hand, any general expression <•! 
value common to all is directly excluded ; for, in the equation 

of value of each commodity, all other COmmoditi a ii<>\\ ap| 



36 Capitalist Production. 

only under the form of equivalents. The expanded form of 
value comes into actual existence for the first time so soon as 
a particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer 
exceptionally, but habitually, exchanged for various other 
commodities. 

The third and lastly developed form expresses the values ol 
the whole world of commodities in terms of a single commodity 
set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents 
to us their values by means of their equality with linen. The 
value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, 
not only differentiated from its own use- value, but from all 
other use-values generally, and is, by that very fact, expressed 
as that which is common to all commodities. By this form, 
commodities are, for the first time, effectively brought into 
relation with one another as values, or made to appear as 
exchange values. 

The two earlier forms either express the value of each com- 
modity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or 
in a series of many such commodities. In both cases, it is, so 
to say, the special business of each single commodity to find an 
expression for its value, and this it does without the help of 
the others. These others, with respect to the former, play the 
passive parts of equivalents. The general form of value, C, 
results from the joint action of the whole world of commoditieSj 
and from that alone. A commodity can acquire a general expres- 
sion of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously 
with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent ; and 
every new commodity must follow suit. It thus becomes 
evident that, since the existence of commodities as values is 
purely social, this social existence can be expressed by the 
totality of their social relations alone, and consequently 
that the form of their value must be a socially recognised 
form. 

All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only 
as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values 
whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing 
the magnitudes of their values in one and the same material, 
the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other. 



Com modities. 3 7 

For instance, 10 lbs. of tea = 20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. of 
coffee == 20 yards of linen. Therefore, 10 lbs. of tea = 40 lbs. 
of coffee. In other words, there is contained in 1 lb. of coffee 
only one-fourth as much substance of value — labour — as is con- 
tained in 1 lb. of tea. 

The general form of relative value, embracing the whole 
world of commodities, converts the single commodity that is 
excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent 
— here the linen — into the universal equivalent. The bodily 
form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the 
values of all commodities ; it therefore becomes directly 
exchangeable with all and every of them. The substance 
linen becomes the visible incarnation, the social chrysalis state 
of every kind of human labour. Weaving, which is the labour 
of certain private individuals producing a particular article, linen, 
acquires in consequence a social character, the character of 
equality with all other kinds of labour. The innumerable 
equations of which the general form of value is composed, 
equate in turn the labour embodied in the linen to that em- 
bodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert 
weaving into the general form of manifestation of undiffer- 
entiated human labour. In this manner the labour realised in 
the values of commodities is presented not only under its 
negative aspect, under which abstraction is made from every 
concrete form and useful property of actual work, but 
its own positive nature is made to reveal itself expressly. 
The genera] value-form is the reduction of all kinds of 
actual labour to their common character of being human 
labour generally, of being the expenditure of human labour 
power. 

The general value form, which represents all products of 
labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human Labour, 
-hows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the 
world of Commodities. That form consequently makes it 

indisputably evident that in the world of commodities the 
character possessed by all labour of being human labour 
constitutes its specific social character, 



"S Capitalist Prodttction 



o 



2. The interdependent development of the Relative form of value, 
and of the Equivalent form. 

The degree of development of the relative form of value 
corresponds to that of the equivalent form. But we must bear 
in mind that the development of the latter is only the expres- 
sion and result of the development of the former. 

The primary or isolated relative form of value of one 
commodity converts some other commodity into an isolated 
equivalent. The expanded form of relative value, which is the 
expression of the value of one commodity in terms of all other 
commodities, endows those other commodities with the character 
of particular equivalents differing in kind. And lastly, a 
particular kind of commodity acquires the character of 
universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the 
material in which they uniformly express their value. 

The antagonism between the relative form of value and the 
equivalent form, the two poles of the value form, is developed 
concurrently with that form itself. 

The first form, 20 yds. of linen = one coat, already contains 
this antagonism, without as yet fixing it. According as we 
read this equation forwards or backwards, the parts pla} T ed by 
the linen and the coat are different. In the one case the 
relative value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the 
other case the relative value of the coat is expressed in the 
linen. In this first form of value, therefore, it is difficult to 
grasp the polar contrast. 

Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can 
completely expand its relative value, and that it acquires this 
expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other com- 
modities are, with respect to it, equivalents. Here we cannot 
reverse the equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. of linen = 
1 coat, without altering its o-enerah character, and converting 
it from the expanded form of value into the general form of 
value. 

finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a 
general social relative form of value, because, and in so far as, 
thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded 



Com modities. 3 9 

from the equivalent form. A single commodit}*, the linen, 
appears therefore to have acquired the character of direct ex- 
changeability with every other commodity because, and in so 
far as, this character is denied to every other commodity. 1 

The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on 
the other hand, excluded from the relative value form. If the 
linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, 
were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, 
it would have to serve as its own equivalent. We should then 
have 20 yds. of linen = 20 yds. of linen ; this tautology ex- 
presses neither value, nor magnitude of value. In order to 
express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must 
rather reverse the form C. This equivalent has no relative 
form of value in common with other commodities, but its value 
is relatively expressed by a never ending series of other com- 
modities. Thus, the expanded form of relative value, or form 
B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative value for the 
equivalent commodity. 

3. Transition from the General form of value to the 

Money form. 

The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. 
Tt can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity. On the 4 
other hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the 
universal equivalent form (form C), this is only because and 

1 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and universal ex- 
changeability is, 10 to speak, a polar one, and us intimately connected wit 1 1 its opposite 
pole, the absence of direct exchangeability, as the positive polo of the magnet is with 
its negative counterpart. It may therefore be imagined that all commodities can 
simultaneously b;ive this character impressed upon them, just as it can bo imagined 

that all Catholics can be popes together. It is, of coins.-, highly desirable in tin 

of the petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the ne plus ultra 
of human Freedom and individual independence, that the inconveniences resulting 

from this obaraoter of commodities not being directly exchangeable, should be r« 

moved. Proudhon'l socialism is a woihing out of this Philistine 1'topia, a form of 

looialisrn which, m I have elsewhere shown, does not] ren the merit of origin' 

ality. Long before bis time, the task was attempted with much better suooees by 

<iiay, Bray, and Others, But, for all that. Wisdom Of this kind flourishes even now 

in oertain circles under the name of "science/ 1 Never has any school played 1 

tricks with the word scim. e, than that of l'roudhon, for 

" wo Begi life ft ■bleu 
Di stellt zur rechten X<it ein Wort stab eln." 



40 Capitalist Production. 

in so far as it has been excluded from the rest of all other 
commodities as their equivalent, and that by their own act. 
And from the moment that this exclusion becomes finally 
restricted to one particular commodit}^ from that moment only, 
the general form of relative value of the world of commodities 
obtains real consistence and general social validity. 

The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the 
equivalent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the 
money commodity, or serves as money. It becomes the special 
social function of that commodity, and consequently its social 
monopoly, to play within the world of commodities the part of 
the universal equivalent. Amongst the commodities which, in 
form B, figure as particular equivalents of the linen, and, in 
form C, express in common their relative values in linen, this 
foremost place has been attained by one in particular — namely, 
gold. If, then, in form C we replace the linen by gold, we get, 

D. The Money form. 

20 yards of linen = 

1 coat = 

] lb of tea = 

40 lb of coffee = 2 ounces of gold 

1 qr. of corn = 

\ a ton of iron = 

x commodity A = 

In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to 
form C, the changes are fundamental. On the other hand, 
there is no difference between forms C and D, except that, in 
the latter, gold has assumed the equivalent form in the place 
of linen. Gold is in form D, what linen w T as in form C — the 
universal equivalent. The progress consists in this alone, that 
the character of direct and universal exchangeability — in other 
words, that the universal equivalent form — has now, by social 
custom, become finally identified with the substance, gold. 

Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities 
only because it was previously, with reference to them, a 
simple commodity. Like all other commodities, it was also 



Commodities. 4 1 

capable of serving as an equivalent, either as simple equivalent 
in isolated exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side 
of others. Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, 
as universal equivalent. So soon as it monopolises this posi- 
tion in the expression of value for the world of commodities, 
it becomes the money commodity, and then, and not till then, 
does form D become distinct from form C, and the general 
form of value become changed into the money form. 

The elementary expression of the relative value of a single 
commodity, such as linen, in terms of the commodity, such as 
gold, that plays the part of money, is the price form of that 
commodity. The price form of the linen is therefore 

20 yards of linen = 2 ounces of gold, or, if 2 ounces of gold 
when coined are £2, 20 yards of linen = £2. 

The difficulty in forming a concept of the money form, con- 
sists in clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, 
and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form C. 
The latter is deducible from form B, the expanded form of 
value, the essential component element of which, we saw, is 
form A, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or x commodity A = y com- 
modity B. The simple commodity form is therefore the germ 
of the money form. 



Section 4. — The fetishism of commodities and the secret thereof. 

A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and 
easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a 
very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and 
theological niceties. So far as it is a value in use, there is 
nothing mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the 
point of view that by its properties it is capable of satisfying 
human wants, or from the point that those properties are tin' 
product of human labour. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, 
by his industry, changes the forms of the materials furnished 
by nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. The 
form of wood, For instance, is altered, by making a table out of 
it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common, 



42 Capitalist Production. 

every-clay thing, wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a 
commodity, it is changed into something transcendent. It not 
only stands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all 
other commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of its 
wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than " table- 
turning " ever was. 

The mystical character of commodities does not originate, 
therefore, in their use- value. Just as little does it proceed from 
the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in the 
first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour, or pro- 
ductive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they 
are functions of the human organism, and that each such func- 
tion, whatever may "be its nature or form, is essentially the ex- 
penditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &a Secondly, with 
regard to that which forms the ground-work for the quantitative 
determination of value, namely, the duration of that expendi- 
ture, or the quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there is a 
palpable difference between its quantity and quality. In all 
states of society, the labour-time that it costs to produce the 
means of subsistence, must necessarily be an object of interest 
to mankind, though not of equal interest in different stages of 
development. 1 And lastly, from the moment that men in any 
way work for one another, their labour assumes a social form. 

Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product 
of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities ? 
Clearly from this form itself. The equality of all sorts of 
human labour is expressed objectively by their products all 
being equally values; the measure of the expenditure of labour- 
power by the duration of that expenditure, takes the form of 
the quantity of value of the products of labour; and finally, 
the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social 
character of their labour affirms itself, take the form of a 
social relation between the products. 

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because 
in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an 

1 Among the ancient Germans the unit for measuring land was what could be 
harvested in a day, and was called Tagwerk, Tagwannc (jurnale, or terra jurnalis. or 
diornalis), Mannsmaad, &c. (See G. L. von Maurer Einleitung zur Geschichte der 
Mark—, &c. Verfassung, Munchen, 1S59, p. 129-59.) 



Commodities. 43 

objective character stamped upon the product of that labour; 
because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their 
own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing 
not between themselves, but between the products of their 
labour. This is the reason why the products of labour become 
commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time 
perceptible and imperceptible by the senses. In the same way 
the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective 
excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of 
something outside the eye itself. But, in the act of seeing, 
there is at all events, an actual passage of light from one thing 
to another, from the external object to the eye. There is a 
physical relation between physical things. But it is different 
with commodities. There, the existence of the things qua 
commodities, and the value relation between the products of 
labour which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no 
connection with their physical properties and with the material 
relations arising: therefrom. There it is a definite social rela- 
tion between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic 
form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to find 
an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions 
of the religious world. In that world the productions of the 
human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, 
and entering into relation both with one another and the human 
race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products 
of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself 
to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as com- 
modities, and which is therefore inseparable from the produc- 
tion of commodities. 

This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the fore- 
going analysis has already shown, in the peculiar BOcial 
character of the labour that produces them. 

As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only 
because they are products of the labour of private individuals 
or groups <>f individuals who cany on their work independently 
of each other. The sum total of the labour of all these piiv.it • 
individuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the 

producers do not come into social contact with each other until 



44 Capitalist Production. 

they exchange their products, the specific social character of 
each producer's labour does not show itself except in the act of 
exchange. In other words, the labour of the individual asserts 
itself as a part of the labour of society, only by means of the 
relations which the act of exchange establishes directly between 
the products, and indirectly, through them, between the pro- 
ducers. To the latter, therefore, the relations connecting the 
labour of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as 
direct social relations between individuals at work, but as what 
they really are, material relations between persons and social 
relations between things. It is only by being exchanged that 
the products of labour acquire, as values, one uniform social 
status, distinct from their varied forms of existence as objects 
of utility. This divisiou of a product into a useful thing and 
a value becomes practically important, only when exchange 
has acquired such an extension that useful articles are produced 
for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as 
values has therefore to be taken into account, beforehand, 
during production. From this moment the labour of the 
individual producer acquires socially a two-fold character. On 
the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour, 
satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part 
and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a social 
division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. On the 
other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of the individual 
producer himself, only in so far as the mutual exchangeability 
of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, 
and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks 
on an equality with that of all others. The equalisation of the 
most different kinds uf labour can be the result only of an 
abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing them to 
their common denominator, viz., expenditure of human labour 
power or human labour in the abstract. The two-fold social 
character of the labour of the individual appeals to him, when 
reflected in his brain, only under those forms which are im- 
pressed upon that labour in everyday practice by the exchange 
of products. In this way, the character that his own labour 
possesses of being socially useful takes the form of the condition, 



Commodities. 4 5 

that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, 
and the social character that his particular labour has of being 
the equal of all other particular kinds of labour, takes the form 
that all the physically different articles that are the products 
of labour, have one common quality, viz., that of having value. 

Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into rela- 
tion with each other as values, it is not because we see in these 
articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. 
Quite the contrary : whenever, by an exchange, we equate as 
values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, 
as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon 
them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it. 1 
Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing 
what it is. It is value, rather, that converts every product 
into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the 
hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social pro- 
ducts ; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as 
much a social product as language. The recent scientific dis- 
covery, that the products of labour, so far as they are values, 
are but material expressions of the human labour spent in 
their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the history of the 
development of the human race, but, by no means, dissipates 
the mist through which the social character of labour appears 
to us to be an objective character of the products themselves. 
The fact, that in the particular form of production with which 
we are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the specific 
social character of private labour carried on independently, 
consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue 
of its being human labour, which character, therefore, assumes 
in tho product the form of value — this fact appears to the 
producers, nut withstanding tho discovery above referred to, 
to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery 
by BCience of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself 
remained unaltered, 

What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they 

1 When, therefore, Geliani leyi; V;ilu<> is a relation between pereom "Li 
Kicohezza \ ana regione tra doe i" none,"- In- ought to hew added sen letion be 

1 pertont ex] I tee relation betweon things. (Galiani : Delia Monet 

221, V. [II. ofCu todi's oolleotlon of " Sorittori < Italian! 'li Economia I 

Woe." Parte Modi rna, Milano, L803) 



46 Capitalist Production. 

make an exchange, is the question, how much of some other 
product they get for their own? in what proportions the pro- 
ducts are exchangeable ? When these proportions have, by 
custom, attained a certain stability, they appear to result from 
the nature of the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron 
and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to be of equal value 
as a pound of gold and a pound of iron in spite of their 
different physical and chemical qualities appear to be of equal 
weight. The character of having value, when once impressed 
upon products, obtains fixity only by reason of their acting and 
re-acting upon each other as quantities of value. These 
quantities vary continually, independently of the will, fore- 
sight and action of the producers. To them, their own social 
action takes the form of the action of objects, which ride the 
producers instead of being ruled by them. It requires a fully 
developed production of commodities before, from accumulated 
experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, that all 
the different kinds of private labour, which are carried on in- 
dependently of each other, and yet as spontaneously developed 
branches of the social division of labour, are continually being 
reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society re- 
quires them. And why ? Because, in the midst of all the 
accidental and ever fluctuating exchange-relations between 
the products, the labour-time socially necessary for their pro- 
duction forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of nature. 
The law of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about 
our ears. 1 The determination of the magnitude of value by 
labour-time is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent 
fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. Its dis- 
covery, while removing all appearance of mere accidentally 
from the determination of the magnitude of the values of 
products, yet in no way alters the mode in which that 
determination takes place. 

Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, 

1 "What are we to think of a law that asserts itself only by periodical revolu- 
tions? It is just nothing but a law of Nature, founded on the want of knowledge of 
those whose action is the BUbject of it.'' (Friedrich Engels : Umrisse zu einer Kritik 
der Nation lokonomie," in the " Deutsch-franzosische Jahrbiichcr," edited by Arnold 
Euge and Karl Marx. Paris, 1814.) 



Commodities. 47 

also, his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly 
opposite to that of their actual historical development. He 
begins, post festum, with the results of the process of develop- 
ment ready to hand before him. The characters that stamp 
products as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary 
preliminary to the circulation of commodities, have already 
acquired the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social 
life, before man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, 
for in his eyes they are immutable, but their meaning. 
Consequently it was the analysis of the prices of commodities 
that alone led to the determination of the magnitude of value, 
and it was the common expression of all commodities in money 
that alone led to the establishment of their characters as values. 
It is, however, just this ultimate money form of the world of 
commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the 
social character of private labour, and the social relations 
between the individual producers. When I state that coats or 
boots stand in a relation to linen, because it is the universal 
incarnation of abstract human labour, the absurdity of the 
statement is self-evident. Nevertheless, when the producers of 
coats and boots compare those articles with linen, or, what is 
the same thing, with gold or silver, as the universal equivalent, 
they express the relation between their own private labour and 
the collective labour of society in the same absurd form. 

The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like 
forma They are forms of thought expressing with social 
validity the conditions and relations of a delinite, historically 
determined mode of production, viz., the production of com- 
modities. The whole mystery of commodities, all the magic 
ami necromancy that surrounds the products of Labour as long 
as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so 
soon as we c >me to other forms of production. 

Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme 

with political economists, 1 let us take; a look at him on his 
1 Kvrn Etioardo I ties I la Robinson. " Be makes the primitive hunter and 

the |'i imil i\ '■ I 

i'H' proportion in which labour-time b incorporated In theec exchange values. On 
this occasion he ooramiti the anachronism of mail e men apply to th< 

their implements hav< to be taken into account, the annuitj I 



48 Capitalist Production. 

island. Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to 
satisfy, and must therefore do a little useful work of various 
sorts, such as making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing 
and hunting. Of his prayers and the like we take no account, 
since they are a source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon 
them as so much recreation. In spite of the variety of his 
work, he knows that his labour, whatever its form, is but the 
activity of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that 
it consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. 
Necessity itself compels him to apportion his time accurately 
between his different kinds of work. Whether one kind 
occupies a greater space in his general activity than another, 
depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, 
to be overcome in attaining the useful effect aimed at. This 
our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, and having 
rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck, 
commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. 
His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that 
belong to him, of the operations necessary for their production ; 
and lastly, of the labour time that definite quantities of those 
objects have, on an average, cost him. All the relations 
between Robinson and the objects that form this wealth of his 
own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible 
without exertion, even to Mr. Sedley Taylor. And yet those 
relations contain all that is essential to the determination of 
value. 

Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island 
bathed in light to the European middle ages shrouded in dark- 
ness. Here, instead of the independent man, we find everyone 
dependent, serfs and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and 
clergy. Personal dependence here characterises the social 
relations of production just as much as it does the other spheres 
of life organized on the basis of that production. But for the 
very reason that personal dependence forms the groundwork 
of society, there is no necessity for labour and its products to 

current use on the London Exchange in the year 1S17. 'The parallelograms of Mr. 
Owen ' appear to be the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which 
he was acquainted." (Karl Marx : " Zur Kritik," &c, p. 38, 3D.) 



Commodities. 49 

assume a fantastic form different from their reality. They 
take the shape, in the transactions of society, of services in kin- 1 
and payments in kind. Here the particular and natural form 
of labour, and not, as in a society based on production of com- 
modities, its general abstract form is the immediate social form 
of labour. Compulsory labour is just as properly measured by 
time, as commodity-producing labour; but every serf knows 
that what he expends in the service of his lord, is a definite 
quantity of his own personal labour-power. The tithe to Ik; 
rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his blessing. 
No matter, then, what we may think of the parts played by the 
different classes of people themselves in this society, the social 
relations between individuals in the performance of their 
labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal rela- 
tions, and are not disguised under the shape of social relations 
between the products of labour. 

For an example of labour in common or directly associated 
labour, we have no occasion to go back to that spontaneously 
developed form which w r e find on the threshold of the history 
of all civilized races. 1 We have one close at hand in the 
patriarchal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn, 
cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. These different 
articles are, as regards the family, 50 many products of its 
labour, but as between themselves, they are not commodities. 
The different kinds of labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, 
spinning, weaving and making clothes, which result in the 
various products, are in themselves, and such as they are, direel 
social functions, because functions of the family, which, jusl as 
much as a society based on the production of commodities, 
poss( a spontaneously developed system of division of 

labour. The distribution of the work within the family, and 

1 "A ridiculous presumption has latterly got abroad that common property in \t» 
primitive foi m li specifically nian, or even exclusively Russian foi m. it is the 

primitive form thai ire sail prove t" have existed amongst Romans, Teutons, m • 
n ti» this day ire find numerous examples, ruins though they be, in 
India. A more exhaustive study of Asiatio, and especially of indlan forms of common 
property, srould show how from the di(T< reni forms "f primitive common proj 
different forms <>t Its dissolution bavebei n dev< loped. Thus, for instance, tl 
original types of Roman and Teutonic private proper t) ere dednoible from dlffei 
forms of Indian couunon property." (Karl Marx. "Zui Ktit I p, 10.) 



50 Capitalist Production. 

the regulation of the labour-time of the several members, 
depend as well upon differences of age and sex as upon natural 
conditions varying with the seasons. The labour-power of each 
individual, by its very nature, operates in this case merely as 
a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the family, and 
therefore, the measure of the expenditure of individual labour- 
power by its duration, appears here by its very nature as a 
social character of their labour. 

Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a com- 
munity of free individuals, carrying on their work with the 
means of production in common, in which the labour-power of 
all the different individuals is consciously applied as the 
combined labour-power of the community. All the charac- 
teristics of Robinson's labour are here repeated, but with this 
difference, that they are social, instead of individual. Every- 
thing produced by him was exclusively the result of his own 
personal labour, and therefore simply an object of use for 
himself. The total product of our community is a social 
product. One portion serves as fresh means oi production and 
remains social. But another portion is consumed by the 
members as means of subsistence. A distribution of this 
portion amongst them is consequently necessary. The mode 
of this distribution will vary with the productive organization 
of the community,, and the degree of historical development 
attained by the producers. We will assume, but merely for 
the sake of a parallel with the production of commodities, that 
the share of each individual producer in the means of subsis- 
tence is determined by his labour-time. Labour-time would, 
in that case, play a double part. Its apportionment in accor- 
dance with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion 
between the different kinds of work to be done and the various 
wants of the community. On the other hand, it also serves as 
a measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each 
individual, and of his share in the part of the total product des- 
tined for individual consumption. The social relations of the 
individual producers, with regard both to their labour and to its 
products, are in this case perfectly simple and intelligible, and 
that with regard not only to production but also to distribution. 



Commodities. 5 1 

The relisrious world is but the reflex of the real world. -And 
for a society based upon the production of commodities, in 
which the producers in general enter into social relations with 
one another by treating their products as commodities and 
values, whereby they reduce their individual private labour to 
the standard of homogeneous human labour — for such a society, 
i Christianity with its cultus of abstract man, more especially in 
its bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c, is the 
most fitting form of religion. In the ancient Asiatic and other 
ancient modes of production, we find that the conversion of 
products into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men 
into producers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which, 
however, increases in importance as the primitive communities 
approach nearer and nearer to their dissolution. Trading 
nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient world only in 
its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or 
like Jews in the pores of Polish society. Those ancient social 
organisms of production are, as compared with bourgeois 
society, extremely simple and transparent. But they are 
founded either on the immature development of man in- 
dividually, who has not yet severed the umbilical cord that 
unites him with his fellow men in a primitive tribal com- 
munity, or upon direct relations of subjection. They can 
arise and exist only when the development of the productive 
power of labour has not risen beyond alow stage, and when, 
therefore, the social relations within the sphere of material 
lit'**, between man and man, and between man and Nature, are 
correspondingly narrow. This narrowness is reflected in the 
ancient worship of Nature, and in the other elements ol the 
popular religions The religious reflex of the real world can. 
111 any case, only then Anally vanish, when (he practical re 

lations of everyday life offer t<> man none but perfectly in- 
telligible and reasonable relations with regard t<> his fellowmen 
and to nature. 

The life-process <>f society, which is based <>n the process of 
materia] production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it 
is treated as production by freely associated men, and is con 
sciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. 



52 Capitalist Production. 

This, however, demands for society a certain material ground- 
work or set of conditions of existence which in their turn are 
the spontaneous product of a long and painful process of 
development. 

Political economy has indeed analysed, however incom- 
pletely, 1 value and its magnitude, and has discovered what lies 
beneath these forms. But it has never once asked the question 
why labour is represented by the value of its product and labour 
time by the magnitude of that value. 2 These formulae, which 

1 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, and his analysis 
is by far the best, will appear from the 3rd and 4th books of this work. As regards 
value in general, it is the weak point of the classical school of political economy that 
it nowhere, expressly and with full consciousness, distinguishes between labour, as it 
appears in the value of a product and the same labour, as it appears in the use- 
value of that product. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school 
treats labour, at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qualita- 
tive aspect. But it has not the least idea, that when the difference between various 
kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their qualitative unity or equality, 
and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, is implied. For instanct, 
Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de Tracy in this proposition : "As it is 
certain that our physical and moral faculties are alone our original riches, the em- 
ployment of those faculties, labour of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is 
always from this employment that all those things are created, which we call riches. 
. . . It i3 certain, too, that all those things only represent the labour which has 
created them, and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only 
derive them from that (the value) of the labour from which they emanate. " (Ricardo, 
The Principles of Pol. Econ. 3 Ed. Lond. 1821, p. 334). We would here only point 
out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound interpretation upon the words of Des- 
tutt. What the latter really says is, that on the one hand all things which constitute 
wealth represent the labour that creates tbem, but that on the other hand, they ac- 
quire their " two different values " (use-value and exchange-value) from " the value 
of labour." He thus falls into the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who 
assume the value of one commodity (in this case labour) in order to determine the 
values of the rest. But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour (not the 
value of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange-value. Nevertheless, 
Ricardo himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the labour which 
has a two-fold embodiment, that he devotes the whole of his chapter on " Value and 
Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a laborious examination of the trivialities 
of a J. B. Say. And at the finish he is quite astonished to find that Destutt on the 
one hand agrees with him as to labour being the source of value, and on the other 
hand with J. B. Say as to the notion of value. 

2 It is one of the chief failings of classical economy that it has never succeeded, by 
means of its analysis of commodities, and, in particular, of their value, in discover- 
ing that form under which value becomes exchange-value. Even Adam Smith and 
Ricardo, the best representatives of the school, treat the form of value as a thing of 
no importance, as having no connection with the inherent nature of commodities. 
The reason for this is not solely because their attention is entirely absorbed in the 
analysis of the magnitude of value. It lies deeper. The value form of the product 



Com m odities. 5 3 

bear stamped upon them in unmistakeable letters, that they 
belong to a state of society, in which the process of production 
has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, 
.such formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a 
self-evident necessity imposed by nature as productive labour 
itself. Hence forms of social production that preceded the 
bourgeois form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the 
same way as the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian 
religions. 1 

of labour is not only the most abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by 
the product in bourgeois production, and stamps that production as a particular 
species of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical character. If 
then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by nature for every 
state of society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differentia specifica of the 
value-form, and consequently of the commodity-form, and of its further develop- 
ments, money-form, capital-form, &c. We consequently find that economists, who 
are thoroughly agreed as to labour time being the measure of the magnitude of value, 
have the most strange and contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of the 
general equivalent. This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, 
where the commonplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. This led to 
the rise of a restored mercantile system (Ganilh, &c), which sees in value nothing 
but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of that form. Once for all I may 
here state, that by classical political economy, I understand that economy which, 
since the time of W. Petty, has investigated the real relations of production in bour- 
geois society, in contradistinction to vulgar economy, which deals witli appearances 
only, ruminates without ceasing on the materials long since provided by scientific 
economy, and there seeks plausible explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena, 
for bourgeois daily use, but for the rest, confines itself to systematizing in a pedantic 
way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-compla- 
oeni bourgeoisie with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible 
worlds. 

1 " Les 6conomistes ont une singuliere maniere de proceder. II n'y a poor eux que 
deux sortes destitutions, cellcs de l'art et celles de la nature. Lis institutions de 
la feodalite sont des institutions artifiehlles, celles de la bourgeoisie sont des institu 
tiom natui dies, lis rOBM inblent en ceci aux theologiens, qui en\ Musi etablissent 

ileoi sortes de religions. Tout* , qui o/cet pee la leur, eet one invention dei 

hommes, tandis que leui DTOprfl religion est nne emanation de Dieu Ainsi il 
y a in de l'histoiir, mais il ny in a plus.'" (Karl Marx. Mi.srie de la PhiloOOphie. 

tieponee a la Philotophie * I . la Ifieere par IL Proudhon, 1847 p. lit.) Truly oomioal 

liH 1 «;i -tint, who Unaginei that the ancient Qreeki and Etomani lived by plunder 
alone. J*ut whin people plunder for oenturiee, there must elwayi be lomething at 
bend for them toeeieej theobjeeteof plunder must be continually reproduoed. l< 

would thus apprar that e\rii Qreeki and K.unans had som. prOOOOl of DTOduotion, 
consequently, an it my, which jturi as much constituted th. materiel bt •! their 

irorld, as bonrgeoii eoonomj oonetitutei that <>f our modern world, ( »i pi rhapi Bai 
tiat mea n i | that • mode of production baaed on ilavi rj li beied on ■ 13 V m of plan* 

<ler. In that ease he tie. oh on dangetOIII grOUAOl If a giant thinker like Aiiltotle 

erred in his appreciation of imve labour, why ahould 1 dwarf eeonomiel hk. be 

be right in his appreciation uf wage labour - .' I hci.v this Opportunity of shoitly 



54 Capitalist Production, 

To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism 
inherent in commodities, or by the objective appearance of the 
social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, 
by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature 
in the formation of exchange value. Since exchange value is 
a definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour 
bestowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, 
than it has in fixing the course 01 exchange. 

The mode ct production in which the product takes the 
form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the 
most genera] and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. 
It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, 
though not in the same predominating and characteristic 
manner as now-a-days. Hence its Fetish character is com- 
paratively easy to be seen through. But when we come 
to more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity 
vanishes. Whence arose the illusions of the monetary system ? 
To it gold and silver, when serving as money, did not repre- 
sent a social relation between producers, but were natural 
objects with strange social properties. And modern economy, 
which looks down with such disdain on the monetary system, 
does not its superstition come out as clear as noon-day, when- 
ever it treats of capital ? How long is it since economy dis- 
carded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the 
soil and not out of society ? 

answering an objection taken by a German paper in America, to my work, " Zur 
Kritik der Pol. Oekonomie, 1859." In the estimation of that paper, my view that'each 
special mode of production and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that 
the economic structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political 
superstructure is raised, and to which definite social forms of thought correspond : 
that the mode of production determines the character of the social, political, and in- 
tellectual life generally, all this is very true for our own times, in which material 
interests preponderate, but not for the middle ages, in which Catholicism, nor for 
Athens and Rome, where politics, reigned supreme. In the first place it strikes one 
as an odd thing for any one to suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle 
ages and the ancient world are unknown to anyone else. This much, however, is 
clear, that the middle ages could not live or. Catholicism, nor the ancient world on 
politics. On the contrary, it is the mo .'.« in which they gained a livelihood that ex- 
plains why here politics, and there Catholic sm, played the chief part. For the rest, 
it requires but a slight acquaintance with the history of the Roman republic, for 
example, to be aware that its secret history, is the history of its landed property. 
On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid the penalty for wrongly imagining 
that knight errantry was compatible with all "conomical forms of society. 



Commodities. 5 5 

But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet 
another example relating to the commodity form. Could com- 
modities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may 
be a thing that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. 
What, however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. Our 
natural intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of 
each other we are nothing but exchange values. Now listen 
how those commodities speak through the mouth of the econo- 
mist. " Value * — {i.e., exchange value) " is a property of things, 
riches " — (i.e. t use-value) " of man. Value, in this sense, neces- 
sarily implies exchanges, riches do not." 1 "Riches" (use-value) 
11 are the attribute of men, value is the attribute of commodi- 
ties. A man or a community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is 
valuable ... A pearl or a diamond is valuable " as a pearl or 
diamond. 2 80 far no chemist has ever discovered exchange 
value either in a pearl or a diamond. The economical dis- 
coverers of this chemical element, who by-the-bye lay special 
claim to critical acumen, find however that the use-value of 
objects belongs to them independently of their material pro- 
perties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of 
them as objects. What confirms them in this view, is the 
peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is realised 
without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the 
objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is real- 
ised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. 
Who fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who 
informs neighbour Seacoal, that, " To be a well-favoured man 
is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing conies by 
nature." 

1 ( )liscrv;itioiis on certain verbal disputes in Pol. Boon., particularly relating to value 

Mid to demand ami eupply. Lond., L821, p. 16. 
. Bailey, 1. o., p. L65. 
'The author «>f " Observation* " amis. Bailey aocuM Etieardo of converting as 
change vslue from something relative Into something absolute. The opposite is the 
fact. He has explained the appan d1 n lation i>< tween objects, suco as diamond! 
peai Is, in which relation they appear as exchange valu< s, snd disclosed tii« tru< 
tion hidden behind the sppcannocs, namely, their relation bo each other as mete 
expressions of human labour. If the followers of EUcardo answea Bails] somewhat 
rudely, and by do means convincingly, the reason is t<» be sought In this, that thej 

unable to find In Rioardo'i own works an] kej to the hidden relationi 
1m tween value and its form, exchange value. 



56 Capitalist Production. 



CHAPTER IL 

EXCHANGE. 

It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make 
exchanges of their own account. We must, therefore, have 
recourse to their guardians, who are also their owners. Com- 
modities are things, and therefore without power of resistance 
against man. If they are wanting in docility he can use force ; 
in other words, he can take possession of them. 1 Jn order that 
these objects may enter into relation with each other as 
commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation 
to one another, as persons whose will resides in those objects, 
and must behave in sucli a way that each does not appropriate 
the commodity of the other, and part with his own, except by 
means of an act done by mutual consent. They must, there- 
fore, mutually recognise in each other the rights of private 
proprietors. This juridical relation, which thus expresses itself 
in a contract, whether such contract be part of a developed 
legal system or not, is a relation between two wills, and is but 
the reflex of the real economical relation between the two. It 
is this economical relation that determines the subject matter 
comprised in each such juridical act. 2 The persons exist for 
one another merely as representatives of, and, therefore, as 

1 In the 12th century, so renowned for its piety, they included amongst com- 
modities some very delicate things. Thus a French poet of the period enumerates* 
amongst the goods to be found in the market of Landit, not only clothing, shoes, 
leather, agricultural implements, &c, but also " femmes folles de leur corps." 

- l'roudhon begins by taking his ideal of justice, of "justice eternelle," from 
the juridical relations that correspond to the production of commodities : thereby, 
it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of sill good citizens, that the 
production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting as justice. 
Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of commodities, and 
tin- actual legal system corresponding thereto, in accordance with this ideal. What 
opinion should we have of a chemist, who, instead of studying the actual laws of the 
molecular changes in the composition and decomposition of matter, and on that 
foundation solving definite problems, claimed to regulate the composition and 
decomposition of matter by means of the " eternal ideas," of " naturalite " and 
"affinit6?" Do we really know any more about "usury," when we say it contra- 
dicts "justice eternelle," "equite eternelle," " mutualite eternelle," and other 
'• verites eternelles " than the fathers of the church did when they said it was incom- 
patible with " grace eternelle," " foi eternelle," and " la volonte eternelle de Dieu ?" 



Exchange. 5 7 

owners of, commodities. In the course of our investigation we 
shall find, in general, that the characters who appear on the 
economic stage are but the personifications of the economical 
relations that exist between them. 

What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the 
fact, that it looks upon every other commodity as but the form 
of appearance of its own value. A born leveller and a cynic, 
it is always ready to exchange not only soul, but body, with 
any and every other commodity, be the same more repulsive 
than Maritornes herself. The owner makes up for this lack in 
the commodity of a sense of the concrete, by his own five and 
more senses. His commodity possesses for himself no im- 
mediate use-value. Otherwise, he would not bring it to the 
market. It has use-value for others ; but for himself its only 
direct use-value is that of being a depository of exchange 
value, and, consequently, a means of exchange. 1 Therefore, 
lie makes up his mind to part with it for commodities whose 
value in use is of service to him. All commodities are non-use- 
values for their owners, aud use-values for their non-owners. 
Consequently, they must all change hands. But this change 
of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter 
puts them in relation with each other as values, and realises 
(hem as values. Hence commodities must be realised as values 
before they can be realised as use- values. 

On the other hand, they must show that they are use- 
values before they can be realised as values. For the labour 
pent upon them counts effectively, only in BO far as it is spent 
in a form that is useful for others. Whether that labour ia use- 
ful for others, ami its product consequently capable of satisfying 

the wants of others, can be proved only by the act of exchange 

Every owner <>f a commodity wishes to part with it in ei 
change <>nly for those commodities whose use-value satisfies 

.some want of his. Looked at in this way, exchange is Km 

1 "Fof twofold is 1 1 1 • - DM of cvrry ohj.-ct. . . . The on.- is p.niliar to tlio 

* oj.ct us MH li, tin- otli.i i, not, us a saii'lal w liich may In- wm D Mid il MM I 10b 

ftblfc Both Ml uses of tin- .siiniliil, for tVOB DJ IfllO HCOhMlgW tin- handal fof tli* 

money or food DJ II in want of, makes use of tin- MUfliJ M ■ .vuid.il. l'.ut n >t in 

• timil way. For it lias not MtO DBftdc for tin- .sake of Mag rvi-liaiiged.' 

botolM, dc Bep., 1. i. c 9.) 



58 Capitalist Production. 

him simply a private transaction. On the other hand, he de- 
sires to realise the value of his commodity, to convert it into 
any other suitable commodity of equal value, irrespective of 
whether his own commodity has or has not any use-value for 
the owner of the other. From this point of view, exchange is 
for him a social transaction of a general character. But one 
and the same set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for 
all owners of commodities both exclusively private and ex- 
clusively social and general. 

Let us look at the matter a little closer. To the owner o J . a 
commodity, every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a 
particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is 
the universal equivalent for all the others. But since this 
applies to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting 
as universal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities 
possesses no general form under which they can be equated as 
values and have the magnitude of their values compared. So 
far, therefore, they do not confront each other as commodities, 
but only as products or use-values. In their difficulties our 
commodity-owners think like Faust : " Im Anfang war die 
That" They therefore acted and transacted before they 
thought. Instinctively they conform to the laws imposed by 
the nature of commodities. They cannot bring their com- 
modities into relation as values, and therefore as commodities, 
except by comparing them with some one other commodity 
as the universal equivalent. That we saw from the analysis 
of a commodity. But a particular commodity cannot become 
the universal equivalent except by a social act. The social 
action therefore of all other commodities, sets apart the par- 
ticular commodity in which they all represent their values. 
Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the form 
of the socially recognised universal equivalent. To be the 
universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the 
specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. 
Thus it becomes — money. "Illi unum consilium habent et 
virtutem et potestatem suam bestia3 tradunt. Et ne quis 
possit emere aut vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut 
nomen bestise, aut numerum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.) 



Exchange. 59 

Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the 
exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically 
equated to one another and thus by practice converted into 
commodities. The historical progress and extension of ex- 
changes develops the contrast, latent in commodities, between 
use-value and value. The necessity for giving an external 
expression to this contrast for the purposes of commercial in- 
tercourse, urges on the establishment of an independent form 
of value, and finds no rest until it is once for all satisfied by 
the differentiation of commodities into commodities and money. 
At the same rate, then, as the conversion of products into 
commodities is being accomplished, so also is the conversion of 
one special commodity into money. 1 

The direct barter of products attains the elementary form 
of the relative expression of value in one respect, but not in 
another. That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. 
The foim of direct barter is x use-value A = y use-value B. 2 
The articles A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, 
but become so only by the act of barter. The first step made 
by an object of utility towards acquiring exchange-value 
is when it forms a non-use-value for its owner, and that 
happens when it forms a superfluous portion of some article 
required for his immediate wants. Objects in themselves are 
external to man, and consequently alienable by him. In order 
that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for 
men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each other as private 
owners of those alienable objects, and by implication r as inde- 
pendent individuals, lint such a state of reciprocal indepen- 
dence has no existence in a primitive society based on pro- 
perty in common, whether such a society takes the form <>t" a 
patriarchal family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian 

1 From this wt ui:\j form ;m e»fim;ite of the shiewdMSl of the petU-boorgMil 

RocialiMin, which, while perpetuating ilit- production of commodities, aims at abolishing 
the "antagonism ** between money end commodities, endeonsequently, tines money 
< rista only hy virtue of this sntagitnions. at sbftHfhing mom y itself. Wt might just, 
fin w«ii try to retain Catholicism without Iks Pope. Pet more on thin potnl ess my 
work, " Zur Kritik d< r Pel. Oaken.," p. r.i, 1 . ( . 

I So long as, instead of two distinet ass-values being eaehangi d, n shaotls masi e4 
article* are offered as the sonivalsnl of • tingle erticls, which ii often Iks cat*- witk 
savages, sven the direct bsrfc 1 of products it in it» first infancy, 



60 Capitalist Production. 

Inca State. The exchange of commodities, therefore, first 
begins on the boundaries of sucli communities, at their points 
of contact with other similar communities, or with members of 
the latter. So soon, however, as products once become com- 
modities in the external relations of a community, the} r also, 
by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse. The pro- 
portions in which they are exchangeable are at first quite a 
matter of chance. What makes them exchangeable is the 
mutual desire of their owners to alienate them. Meantime the 
need for foreign objects of utility gradually establishes itself. 
The constant repetition of exchange makes it a normal social 
act. In the course of time, therefore, some portion at least of 
the products of labour must be produced with a special view 
to exchange. From that moment the distinction becomes 
firmly established between the utility of an object for the pur- 
poses of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of ex- 
change. Its use- value becomes distinguished from its exchange 
value. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion in 
which the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on 
their production itself. Custom stamps them as values with 
definite magnitudes. 

In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly 
a means of exchange to its owner, and to all other persons an 
equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. 
At this stage, therefore, the articles exchanged do not acquire 
a value-form independent of their own use- value, or of the 
individual needs of the exchangers. The necessity for a value- 
ibrm grows with the increasing number and variety of the 
commodities exchanged. The problem and the means of solu- 
tion arise simultaneously. Commodity-owners never equate 
their own commodities to those of others, and exchange them 
on a large scale, without different kinds of commodities belong- 
ing to different owners being exchangeable for, and equated as 
values to, one and the same special article. Such last-men- 
tioned article, by becoming the equivalent of various other 
commodities, acquires at once, though within narrow limits, 
the character of a general social equivalent. This character 
comes and goes with the momentary social acts that called it 



Exchange* 6 1 



.^ 



into life. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first to this 
and then to that commodity. But with the development 01 
exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular 
sorts of commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the 
money-form. The particular kind of commodity to which it 
sticks is at first a matter of accident. Nevertheless there are 
two circumstances whose influence is decisive. The money- 
form attaches itself either to the most important articles of ex- 
change from outside, and these in fact are primitive and natural 
forms in which the exchange-value of home products finds ex- 
pression ; or else it attaches itself to the object of utility 
that forms, like cattle, the chief portion of indigenous alienable 
wealth. Nomad races are the first to develop the money-form, 
because all their worldly goods consist of moveable objects 
and are therefore directly alienable ; and because their mode of 
life, by continually bringing them into contact with foreign com- 
munities, solicits the exchange of products. Man has often 
made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve as the pri- 
mitive material of money, but has never used land for that 
purpose. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois 
society already well developed. It dates from the last third of 
the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice 
on a national scale was made a century afterwards, during the 
French bourgeois revolution. 

In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the 
value of commodities more and more expands into an embodi- 
ment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion 
the character of money attaches itself to commodities that are 
by nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal 
equivalent. Those commodities are the precious metals. 

The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver 
are not by nature money, money is by nature gold and 
silver," 1 is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of 
these metals for the functions of money. 1 Up to this point, 
however, we are acquainted only with one function of money, 

1 Karl Marx. 1. c. p. 136. " I metalli. . . iiaturahuente uioiieta,'' (Caliani. 
" I >ella moneta " in < 'uslodi's Collection : Parte .Moderna t. iii.). 

~ For further details mi this lubjeot MC in my work cited ahove, the chapter « | 
" The precious metals. " 



62 Capitalist Production. 

namely, to serve as the form of manifestation of the value of 
commodities, or as the material in which the magnitudes of 
their values are socially expressed. An adequate form of 
manifestation of value, a fit embodiment of abstract, undiffer- 
entiated, and therefore equal human labour, that material 
alone can be whose every sample exhibits the same uniform 
qualities. On .the other hand, since the difference between the 
magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, the money com- 
modity must be susceptible of merely quantitative differences, 
must therefore be divisible at will, and equally capable of being 
re-united. Gold and silver possess these properties by nature. 

The use-value of the money commodity becomes twofold. 
In addition to its special use- value as a commodity (gold, 
for instance, serving to st^p teeth, to form the raw material of 
articles of luxury, &c), it acquires a formal use-value, origina- 
ting in its specific social function. 

Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of 
money, the latter being their universal equivalent, they, with 
regard to the latter as the universal commodity, play the parts 
of particular commodities. 1 

We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown 
upon one single commodity, of the value relations between all the 
rest. That money is a commodity 2 is therefore a new discovery 
only for those who, when they analyse it, start from its fully 
developed shape. The act of exchange gives to the commodity 
converted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. 
By confounding these two distinct things some writers have 
been led to hold that the value of s^old and silver is ima^i- 

1 " II danaro e la merce universale (Verri, 1. c, p. 1G). 

- " Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general mine of bullion), 
are . . . commodities . . . rising and falling in . . . value. . . Bullion, then, may 
he reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller weight will purchase the greater 
quantity of the product or manufacture of the oountrey." <kc ("A Discourse of the 
General Notions o' Money, Trade, and Exchange, as they stand in relations to each 
other." By a Merchant. Lond., 1695, p. 7). " Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, 
though they are usee' for a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than 
wine, oyl, lobacco, cloth, or stuti's." ("A Discourse concerning Trade, and that in 
particular of the Bast Indies," &c. London, 1089, p. 2). " The stock and riches of 
the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and silver to be 
excluded from being merchandize." ( tk A Treatise concerning the East India Trade 
being a most profitable Trade." London, lOfe'O, Reprint 10%, p. 4). 



Exchange. 63 

nary. 1 The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced 
by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion, 
that it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless under this error 
lurked a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not 
an inseparable part of that object, but is simply the form under 
which certain social relations manifest themselves. In this 
sense every commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is 
value, it is only the material envelope of the human labour 
spent upon it. 2 But if it be declared that the social characters 
assumed by objects, or the material forms assumed by the 
social qualities of labour under the regime of a definite mode of 
production, are mere symbols, it is in the same breath also 
declared that these characteristics are arbitrary fictions sanc- 
tioned by the so-called universal consent of mankind. This 

1 " L'oro e l'argento banno valore come metalli anteriore all' esser moneta." 
(Galiani, I.e.). Locke says, "The universal consent of mankind gave to silver, on 
account of its qualities which made it suitable for money, an imaginary value." Law, 
on the other hand, " How could different nations give an imaginary value to any 
single thing ... or how could this imaginary value have maintained itself ? " But 
the following shows how little he himself understood about the matter : "Silver was 
exchanged in proportion to the value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to 
its real value. By its adoption as money it received an additional value (une valeur 
additionnelle) " (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et le commerce" in 
E. Daire'i ESdit. of " Economistes Financiers du XVIII. siecle.," p. 470). 

2 " L 'Argent en (des denrdes) est le signe." (V. de Forbonnais : " Elements rlr n on- 
merce, Nouv. Edit. Leyde, 1776," t. II., p. 143). " Comme signe il est attire par Lea 
denrees." (1.**., p. 165). " L'argent estun signe d'une chose et lareprdsente. " (Mon- 
teso"i»n : " Esprit des Lois," Oeuvres, Lond. 17(>7, t. II., p. 2). "L'argent n'est pas 
sin pie signe, car il est lui-metne richesse ; il ne represente pas les valeurs, il 1. > 
eqiiivaut." (Le Trosne, I.e., p. 010). "The notion of value contemplates the valuable 
article as a mere symbol; the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is 
worth." (Hegel, I.e., p. 100). Lawyers started long before economists the idea thai 
money is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious metals is purely iinaginat \ . 
Tins tin v did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, supporting the right 
of tin: latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the middle ages, by the tiadi 

tions of the Roman Empire and the conceptions of money to be found in the Pandects, 

"Qu' aueuii puisse ni doive fiire doiite," says an apt scholar of theirs, Philip of 

Valois, in a decree of LS46, "que a noua et a notre majeste* royale n' appartiennenl 
lenlement . . . le meatier, le fait, l'etat, la provision et toute L'ordonnanoe des 
monnaiea, de donner tel ooora, «-t pour tel prix oomme il nous jilait e1 bon nous 
semble." It was i maxim «>f the Soman Law that the ralueof money waa fixed by 
a of the emperor. It was expressly forbidden to treat money aaa oommodity. 
Pecuniae rero mil li emere Eai erit, nam in nan pnblioo oonatitutas oporto I bob 

iin-rcein." Some i i work on this question has been done by <;. P, Fagnini : 

"8eggio sopia il giuato pregio delle ooae, 1751"; Oustodi "Pari Modern! " t. II 

In the seOOnd part of his work Tagniin directs his poll un.-s aepeoiallj againtt tho 

lawyers. 



64 Capitalist Production. 

suited the mode of explanation in favour during the 18th 
century. Unable to account for the origin of the puzzling 
forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people 
sought to denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing 
to them a conventional orioin. 

It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form 
of a commodity does not imply the determination of the magni- 
tude of its value. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold 
is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other 
commodities, 3 T et that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs., 
for instance, of gold is worth. Money, like every other com- 
modity, cannot express the magnitude of its value except 
relatively in other commodities. This value is determined by 
the labour-time required for its production, and is expressed by 
the quantity of any other commodity that costs the same 
f mount of labour-time. 1 Such quantitative determination of its 
relative value takes place at the source of its production by 
means of barter. When it steps into circulation as money, its 
value is already given. In the last decades of the 17th 
century it had already been shown that money is a commodity, 
but this step marks only the infancy of the analysis. The 
difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a commo- 
dity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a com- 
modity becomes mone}^. 2 

1 " If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Tern, in the 
same time that he can produce a bushel of Corn, then the one is the natural price of 
the other ; now, if by reason of new or more easie mines a man can procure two 
ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, the corn will be as cheap at ten 
shillings the bushel as it was before at five shillings, ceteris paribus." William 
Petty : " A Treatise on Taxes and Contributions." Lond., 1GG2, p. 32. 

2 The learned Professor Koscher, after first informing us that "the false definitions 
of money may be divided into two main groups : those which make it more, and 
those which make it less, than a commodity," gives us a long and very mixed cata- 
logue of works on the nature of money, from which it appears that he has not the 
remotest idea of the real history of the theory ; and then he moralises thus : "For 
the rest, it is not to be denied that most of the later economists do not bear sufficiently 
in mind the peculiarities that distinguish money from other commodities " (it is then, 
after all, either more or less than a commodity !) . . . "So far, the semi-mercantilist 
reaction of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation." (Wilhelm ltoscher: "Die 
Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn., 185S, pp. 277-210.) More! less! 
not sufficiently ! so far ! not altogether ! What clearness and precision of ideas and 
language ! And such eclectic professorial twaddle is modestly baptised by Mr. 
ltoscher, " the anatomico-physiological method " of political economy ! One discovery 
however, he must have credit for, namely, that money is "a pleasant commodity." 



Exchange. 6 =; 



<s 



Wc have already seen, from the most elementary expression 
of value, x commodity A - y commodity B, that the object in 
which the magnitude of the value of another object is repre- 
sented, appears to have the equivalent form independently of 
this relation, as a social property given to it by Nature. We 
followed up this false appearance to its final establishment, 
which is complete so soon as the universal equivalent form 
becomes identified with the bodily form of a particular com- 
modity, and thus crystallised into the money-form. What 
appears to happen is, not that gold becomes money, in conse- 
quence of all other commodities expressing their values in it, 
but, on the contrary, that all other commodities universally 
express their values in gold, because it is money. The inter- 
mediate steps of the process vanish in the result and leave no 
trace behind. Commodities find their own value already com- 
pletely represented, without any initiative on their part, in 
another commodity existing in company with them. These 
objects, gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of 
the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all human 
labour. Hence the magic of money. In the form of society 
now under consideration, the behaviour of men in the social 
process of production is purely atomic. Hence their relations 
to each other in production assume a material character inde- 
pendent of their control and conscious individual action. 
'I hese facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general 
rule taking the form of commodities. We have seen how the 
progressive development of a society of commodity-producers 
stamps one privileged commodity with the character of money. 
Hence the liddle presented by money is but the riddle pre- 
sented by commodities; only it now strikes us ill its most 
glaring form. 



66 Capitalist Production. 



CHAPTER III 

MONEY, OK THE CIRCULATION OF COMMODITIES. 

SECTION 1. — THE MEASURE OF VALUES. 

Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, 
gold as the money-commodity. 

The first chief function of money is to supply commodities 
with the material for the expression of their values, or to re- 
present their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, 
qualitatively equal, and quantitatively comparable. It thus 
serves as a universal measure of value. And only by virtue of 
this function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excel- 
lence, become money. 

It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. 
Just the contrary. It is because all commodities, as values, are 
realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their 
values can be measured by one and the same special commodity, 
and the latter be converted into the common measure of their 
values, i.e., into money. Money as a measure of value, is the 
phenomenal form that must of necessity be assumed by that 
measure of value which is immanent in commodities, labour- 
time. a 

The expression of the value of a commodity in gold — x 
commodity Azy money-commodity — is its money-form or 

1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, so that a 
piece of paper may represent, for instance, x hour's labour, is at bottom the same as 
the question why, given the production of commodities, must products take the form 
of commodities? This is evident, since their taking the form of commodities implies 
their differentiation into commodities and money. Or, why cannot private labour — 
labour for the account of private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate 
social labour? I have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour- 
money" in a society founded on the production of commodities (1. c, p. Gl, seq.). 
On this point I will only say further, that Owen's "labour-money," for instance, is 
no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. Owen presupposes directly 
associated labour, a form of production that is entirely inconsistent with the produc- 
tion of commodities. The certificate of labour is merely evidence of the part taken 
by the individual in the common labour, and of his right to a certain portion of the 
common produce destined for consumption. But it never enters into Owen's head to 
presuppose the production of commodities, and at the same time, by juggling vith 
money, to try to evade the necessary conditions of that production. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 67 

price. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron z 2 ounces of 
gold, now suffices to express the value of the iron in a socially 
valid manner. There is no longer any need for this equation 
to figure as a link in the chain of equations that express the 
values of all other commodities, because the equivalent com- 
modity, gold, now has the character of money. The general 
form of relative value has resumed its original shape of simple 
or isolated relative value. On the other hand, the expanded 
expression of relative value, the endless series of equations, has 
now become the form peculiar to the relative value of the 
money-commodity. The series itself, too, is now given, and 
has social recognition in the prices of actual commodities. We 
have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to 
find the magnitude of the value of money expressed in all sorts 
of commodities. But money itself has no price. In order to 
put it on an equal footing with all other commodities in this 
respect, we should be obliged to equate it to itself as its own 
equivalent. 

The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form 
of value generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable 
bodily form ; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. 
Although invisible, the value of iron, linen and corn has actual 
existence in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible 
by their equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists 
only in their own heads. Their owner must, therefore, lend 
them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before their prices 
can be communicated to the outside world. 1 Since the ex- 
pression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal 

1 Savages ami half-civilised races DM tin- tongue differently. Captain Tarry wn 
of the Inhabitant! on the west coast of Baffin'i Kay: "In thin case (he refen t<- 

barter) they licked it (the thing represented to them) twice to their tongues, aftei 
which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfactorily concluded." In the miil 
way, the Batten Esquimau] licked the artiolei they received in exchange. If the 

tongue U thus need in the North as the organ of Appropriation, no wonder that, in 

the South, the stomach serves as the organ of accumulated property, ami that • 
Kiiflii estimate! the wealth of a man hy the rise of his helly. That the Katlit* kttOU 
what they me about ii hhown hy the following: at the same tinn- that the official 

British Health Report of WW diseloeed the deficiency of fat-forming Food among a 

large part of the Working chi-s, a o-rtain l>r. Ilaivey (not, however, the Oslebl 
discoverer of the circulation ©f the blood), made a good thing by advertising N 
(or reducing the superfluous (at of the bourgeoisie and aiietoOl 



68 Capitalist Production. 

act, we may use for this purpose imaginary or ideal money. 
Every trader knows, that lie is far from having turned his 
goods into money, wdien he has expressed their value in a price 
or in imaginary money, and that it does not require the least 
bit of real gold, to estimate in that metal millions of pounds' 
worth of goods. When, therefore, money serves as a measure 
of value, it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money. 
This circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories. 1 But, 
although the money that performs the functions of a measure 
of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely upon the 
actual substance that is money. The value, or in other words, 
the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, is 
expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money- 
commodity as contains the same amount of labour as the iron. 
According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or 
copper, the value of the ton of iron will be expressed by very 
different prices, or will be represented by very different quan- 
tities of those metals respectively. 

If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and 
silver, are simultaneously measures of value, all commodities 
have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. 
These exist quietly side by side, so long as the ratio of the 
value of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15 : 1. 
Every change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists 
between the gold-prices and the silver-prices of commodities, 
and thus proves, by facts, that a double standard of value is 
inconsistent with the functions of a standard. 2 

1 See Karl Marx: Zur Kritik, &c. "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes, : ' 
p. 53, seq. 

2 "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the function of 
money or of a measure of value side by side, it has always been tried, but in vain, to 
treat them as one and the same material. To assume that there is an invariable 
ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in which a given quantity of labour-time 
is incorporated, is to assume, in fact, that gold and silver are of one and the same 
material, and that a given mass of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant 
fraction of a given mass of gold. From the reign of Edward III. to the time of 
George II., the history of money in England consists of one long series of per- 
turbations caused by the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between the values of 
gold and silver, with the fluctuations in their real values. At one time gold was too 
high, at another, silver. The metal that for the time being was estimated below its 
value, was withdrawn from circulation, melted and exported. The ratio between 
the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ratio soon came 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 69 

Commodities with definite prices present themselves under 
the form : a commodity A = x gold ; b commodity B = z gold; 
c commodity C = y gold, &c, where a, b, c, represent definite 
quantities of the commodities A, B, C and x, z, y, definite 
quantities of gold. The values of these commodities are, 
therefore, changed in imagination into so many different 
quantities of gold. Hence, in spite of the confusing variety of 
the commodities themselves, their values become magnitudes 
of the same denomination, gold-magnitudes. They are now 
capable of being compared with each other and measured, and 
the want becomes technically felt of comparing them with 
some fixed quantity of gold as a unit measure. This unit, by 
subsequent division into aliquot parts, becomes itself the 
standard or scale. Before they become money, gold, silver, 
and copper already possess such standard measures in their 
standards of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, 
while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible into 
ounces, and, on the other, may be combined to make up 
hundredweights. 1 It is owing to this that, in all metallic 
currencies, the names given to the standards of money or of 
price were originally taken from the pre-existing names of the 
standards of weight. 

into conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the slight and transient 
fji.ll in the value of gold compared with silver, which was a consequence of the Indo- 
Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far more extended scale in France the same 
phenomena, export of silver, and its expulsion from circulation by gold. During 
the years 1855, 185G and 1857, the excess in France of gold-imports over gold- 
exports amounted to £41,580,000, while the excess of silver-exports over silver- 
imports was £14,704,000. In fact, in those countries in which both metals are 
legally measures of value, and therefore both legal tender, so that everyone has the 
option of paying in either metal, the metal that rises in value is at a premium, and, 
like every other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which 
alone serves in reality as the standard of value. The result of all experience and 
history with regard to this question is simply that, where two commodities perform 
by law the functions of a measure of value, in practice one alone maintains that 
position." (Karl Marx, 1. c. pp. 52, 5!$.) 

1 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in England as the 
unit of the standard of money, the pound sterling does not form an aliquot part of it, 
has been explained as follows : " Our coinage was originally adapted to the employ 
mcnt of silver oidy, hence, an ounce of silver can always be divided into a certain 
adequate number of pieces of coin ; but as gold was introduced at a later period into 
a coinage adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot 
number of pieces." Maclaren, " A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 
1858, p. 1G. 



jo Capitalist Production. 

.As Treasure of value and as standard of price, money has two 
entirely distinct functions to perform. It is the measure 
of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation 
of human labour ; it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is 
a fixed weight of metal. As the measure of value it serves to 
convert the values of all the manifold commodities into prices, 
into imaginary quantities of gold ; as the standard of price it 
measures those quantities of gold. The measure of values 
measures commodities considered as values ; the standard of 
price measures, on the contrary, quantities of gold by a unit 
quantity of gold, not the value of one quantity of gold by the 
weight of another. In order to make gold a standard of price, 
a certain weight must be fixed upon as the unit. In this case, 
as in all cases of measuring quantities of the same denomina- 
tion, the establishment of an unvarying unit of measure is all- 
important. Hence, the less the unit is subject to variation, so 
much the better does the standard of price fulfil its office. But 
only in so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, therefore, 
potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure of 
value. 1 

It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value 
of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard 
of price. No matter how this value varies, the proportions 
between the values of different quantities of the metal remain 
constant. However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of 
gold still have 12 times the value of i ounce; and in prices, 
the only thing considered is the relation between different 
quantities of gold. Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall in 
the value of an ounce of gold can alter its weight, no alteration 
can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts. Thus gold 
always renders the same service as an invariable standard of 
price, however much its value may vary. 

In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not 
interfere with its functions as a measure of value. The change 
affects all commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, coeteris 
paribus, leaves their relative values inter se, unaltered, although 

1 With English writers the confusion between measure of value and standard of 
price (standard of value) is indescribahle. Their functions, an well as tbeir names. 
are constantly interchanged. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities, ji 

those values are now expressed in higher or lower gold- 
prices. 

Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by 
a definite quantity of the use- value of some other commodity, 
so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume 
nothing more than that the production of a given quantity of 
gold costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. As 
regards the fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to 
the laws of elementary relative value investigated in a former 
chapter. 

A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, 
either from a rise in their values — the value of money remain- 
ing constant — or from a fall in the value of money, the values 
of commodities remaining constant. On the other hand, a 

O 7 

general fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the 
values of commodities — the value of money remaining con- 
stant — or from a rise in the value of monev, the values of 

»/ 7 

commodities remaining constant. It therefore by no means 
follows, that a rise in the value of money necessarily implies a 
proportional fall in the prices of commodities ; or that a fall in 
the value of money implies a proportional rise in prices. 
Such change of price holds good only in the case of com- 
modities whose value remains constant. With those, for 
example, whose value rises, simultaneously with, and propor- 
tionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. 
And if their value rise either slower or faster than that of 
money, the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by 
the difference between the change in their value and that of 
money; and so on. 

Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form. 

By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current 
money names of the various weights of the precious metal 
figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names 
originally represented. This discrepancy is the result of 
historical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The im 
portation of foreign money into an imperfectly developed 
community. This happened in Rome in its early days, where 
gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodity 



7 2 Capitalist Production. 

The names of these foreign coins never coincide with those of 
the indigenous weights. (2) As wealth increases, the less 
precious metal is thrust out by the more precious from its place 
as a measure of value, copper by silver, silver by gold, however 
much this order of sequence may be in contradiction with 
poetical chronology. ' The word pound, for instance, was the 
money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver. When 
gold replaced silver as a measure of value, the same name was 
applied according to the ratio between the values of silver and 
gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound of gold. The word pound, 
as a money-name, thus becomes differentiated from the same 
word as a weight-name. 2 (3) The debasing of money carried 
on for centuries by kings and princes to such an extent that, of 
the original weights of the coins, nothing in fact remained but 
the names. 

These historical causes convert the separation of the money- 
name from the weight-name into an established habit with the 
community. Since the standard of money is on the one hand 
purely conventional, and must on the other hand find general 
acceptance, it is in the end regulated by law. A given weight 
of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, 
becomes officially divided into aliquot parts, with legally 
bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, Sec. These aliquot 
parts, which thenceforth serve as units of money, are then sub- 
divided into other aliquot parts with legal names, such as 
shilling, penn}^, &c. 4 But. both before and after these 
divisions are made, a definite weight of metal is the standard 
of metallic money. The sole alteration consists in the sub- 
division and denomination. 

1 Moreover, it has not general historical validity. 

2 It is thus that the pound sterling in English denotes less than one-third of its 
original weight ; the pound Scot, before the union, only l-3Gth ; the French livre, 
l-74th ; the Spanish maravedi, less than l-1000th ; and the Portuguese rei a still 
smaller fraction. 

3 "Le monete le quali oggi sono ideali sono le piu antiche d'ogni nazione, e tutto 
furono un tempo reali, e perche erano reali con esse si contava." (Galiani : Delia 
moneta, 1. c, p. 153.) 

4 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words " on the monstrosity (!) that 
now-a-days a pound (sterling), which is the unit of the English standard of money, is 
equal to about a quarter of an ounce of gold. " This is falsifying a measure, not 
establishing a standard." He sees in this "false denomination" of the weight of 
gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand of civilisation. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 73 

The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of 
commodities are ideally changed, are therefore now expressed 
in the names of coins, or in the legally valid names of the sub- 
divisions of the gold standard. Hence, instead of saying: A 
quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold ; we say, it is worth 
£3 17s. lOJd. In this way commodities express by their prices 
how much they are worth, and money serves as money of 
account whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an 
article in its money-form. l 

The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities 
of that thing. I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his 
name is Jacob. In the same way with regard to money, every 
trace of a value-relation disappears in the names pound, dollar, 
franc, ducat, &c. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden 
meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because 
these money-names express both the values of commodities, 
and, at the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal 
that is the standard of money. 2 On the other hand, it is 
absolutely necessary that value, in order that it may be distin- 
guished from the varied bodily forms of commodities, should 
assume this material and unmeaning, but, at the same time, 
purely social form. 3 

1 When Anacharsis was asked for what purposes the Greeks used money, he re- 
plied, "For reckoning." (Athen. Deipn. 1. iv. 49 v. 2. ed Schweighiiuser, 1802.) 

2 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard of price, appears 
under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, and that therefore 
the sum of 1'3 17s. 10'd. may signify on the one hand an ounce weight of gold, and 
on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this reckoning name of money has been 
called its mint-price. Hence there sprang up the extraordinary notion, that the 
value of gold is estimated in its own material, and that, in contra-distinction to all 
other commodities, its price is fixed by the State. It was erroneously thought that 
the giving of reckoning names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing 
the vtilue of those weights." (Karl Marx. 1. c, p. 52.) 

; Bee " Theorien von der Afatseinheit dei Geldei " in " Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekon. 
&c," p. 53} seq. Thefantaitio notions about raising or lowering the mint-price of 

money by transferring to greater or smaller weights of gold or silver the names already 
legally appropriated to fixed weights of those metals ; such notions, at least in those 
eases in which they aim, not at clumsy financial operations against creditors, both 
pnblio and private, but at economical quack remedies have been so exhaustively 
treated by \Y r m. Petty in his " Quantulumcumpie concerning money: To the Lord 
Marquis of Halifax, L682," that even ids immediate followers, Biz Dudley North and 
John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him. " If the wealth of a 
nation," ho remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were strange that 
such proclamations have not long since been made by our Governors." (1. c, p. 3G.) 



74 Capitalist Production. 

Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commo- 
dity. Hence the expression of the equivalence of a commodity 
with the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, 1 
just as in general the expression of the relative value of a 
commodity is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities. 
But although price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a 
commodity's value, is the exponent of its exchange-ratio with 
money, it does not follow that the exponent of this exchange- 
ratio is necessarily the exponent of the magnitude of the com- 
modity's value. Suppose two equal quantities of socially 
necessary labour to be respectively represented by 1 quarter 
of wheat and £2 (nearly h oz. of gold), £2 is the expression in 
money of the magnitude of the value of the quarter of wheat, 
or is its price. If now circumstances allow of this price being 
raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced to £1, then although 
£1 and £3 may be too small or too great properly to express 
the magnitude of the wheat's value, nevertheless they are its 
prices, for they are, in the first place, the form under which its 
value appears, i.e., money ; and in the second place, the ex- 
ponents of its exchange-ratio with money. If the conditions 
of production, in other words, if the productive power of labour 
remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time must, 
both before and after the change in price, be expended in the 
reproduction of a quarter of wheat. This circumstance de- 
pends, neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that 
of the owners of other commodities. 

Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, 
it expresses the connection that necessarily exists between a 
certain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society 
required to produce it. As soon as magnitude of value is con- 
verted into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape 
of a more or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single 
commodity and another, the money-commodity. But this ex- 
change-ratio may express either the real magnitude of that 
commodity's value, or the quantity of gold deviating from that 
value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be parted 

1 u Ou bien, il faut consentir a dire qu'une valeur d'un million en argent vaut plus 
qu'une valeur egale en marchandises." (Le Trosne 1. c. p. 919), which amounts to 
baying " qu'une valeur vaut plus qu'une valeur egalo." 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 75 

with. The possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity 
between price and magnitude of value, or the deviation of the 
former from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself. 
This is no defect, but, on the contrary, admirably adapts the 
price-form to a mode of production whose inherent laws impose 
themselves only as the mean of apparently lawless irregulari- 
ties that compensate one another. 

The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the 
possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude 
of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression 
in money, but it may also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so 
much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form of 
commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. Objects 
that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, 
foe., are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and 
of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. 
Hence an object may have a price without having value. The 
price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathe- 
matics. On the other hand, the imaginary price-form may 
sometimes conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; 
for instance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without 
value, because no human labour has been incorporated in it. 

Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of 
a commodity {e.g., a ton of iron), by stating that a given quan- 
tity of the equivalent [e.g , an ounce of gold), is directly ex- 
changeable for iron. But it by no means states the converse, 
that iron is directly exchangeable for gold. In order, there- 
fore, that a commodity may in practice act effectively as ex- 
change value, it must quit its bodily shape, must transform it- 
self from mere imaginary into real gold, although to the commo- 
dity such transubstantiation may be more difficult than to the 
Hegelian " concept," the transition from " necessity " to " free- 
dom," or to a lobster the casting <>t' his shell, or to Saint Jerome 
the putting off of the old Adam. 1 Though a commodity may. 

1 Jexome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the bodilj flesh, an il 
shown hy his fight in the desert with the; handsome women of his imagination, bill 
also in his old Sge with the spiritual fleih. " I thought," he says, "I was in the 
>-pii it he luic the Judge Of the I Hi verse.'' " Who art thou ? "' asked | roioe. "1 Sin 

t Christian." "Thou Host," thundered back the great Judge, "thou art nought but 
i ( liceronian." 



7 6 Capitalist Production. 

side by side with its actual form (iron, for instance), take in 
our imagination the form of gold, yet it cannot at one and the 
same time actually be both iron and gold. To fix its price, it 
suffices to equate it to gold in imagination. But to enable it to 
render to its owner the service of a universal equivalent, it 
must be actually replaced by gold. If the owner of the iron 
were to go to the owner of some other commodity offered for 
exchange, and were to refer him to the price of the iron as 
proof that it was already money, he would get the same 
answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter 

recited the creed — 

" Assai bene e trascorsa 
D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso, 
Ma dimmi se tu Thai nella tua borsa." 

A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchange- 
able for money, and also that it must be so exchanged. On 
the other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only 
because it has already, in the process of exchange, established 
itself as the money-commodity. Under the ideal measure of 
values there lurks the hard cash. 

SECTION 2. — THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION. 

a. The Metamorpliosis of Commodities. 

We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodi- 
ties implies contradictory and mutually exclusive conditions. 
The differentiation of commodities into commodities and money 
does not sweep away these inconsistencies, but developes 
a modus vivendi, a form in which they can exist side by side. 
This is generally the way in which real contradictions are 
reconciled. For instance, it is a contradiction to depict one 
body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the same 
time, constantly flying away from it. The ellipse is a form of 
motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the 
same time reconciles it. 

In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are 
transferred from hands in which they are non-use- values, to 
hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circula- 
tion of matter. The product of one form of useful labour 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. JJ 

replaces that of another. When once a commodity has found 
a resting-place, where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out 
of the sphere of exchange into that of consumption. But the 
former sphere alone interests us at present. We have, there- 
fore, now to consider exchange from a formal point of view ; to 
investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of commodi- 
ties which effectuates the social circulation of matter. 

The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very 
imperfect. The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indis- 
tinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a 
commodity results from the exchange of two commodities, an 
ordinary one and the money-commodity. If we keep in view the 
material fact alone thatacommodity has been exchanged for gold, 
we overlook the very thing that we ought to observe — namely, 
what has happened to the form of the commodity. We overlook 
the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and 
that when other commodities express their prices in gold, this 
gold is but the money-forin of those commodities themselves. 

Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange 
just as they are. The process then differentiates them into 
commodities and money, and thus produces an external oppo- 
sition corresponding to the internal opposition inherent in 
them, as being at once use-values and values. Commodities as 
use-values now stand opposed to money as exchange value. 
On the other hand, both opposing sides are commodities, 
unities of use-value and value. But this unity of differences 
manifests itself at two opposite poles, and at each pole in an 
opposite way. Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as 
they are connected. On the one side of the equation we have, 
an ordinary commodity, which is in reality a use- value. Its 
value is expressed only ideally in its price, by which it is 
equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real embodiment 
of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic 
realit\ r , ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. Cold, 
as gold, is exchange value; itself. As to its use-value, that pas 
only an ideal existence, represented by the series of expres- 
sions of relative value in which it stands face to face with all 
other commodities, the sum of whose uses makes up the sum 



/S Capitalist Production. 

of the various uses of gold. These antagonistic forms of com- 
modities are the real forms in which the process of their 
exchange moves and takes place. 

Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, 
our old friend the weaver of linen — to the scene of action, the 
market. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. He 
exchanges it for the £*2, and then, like a man of the good old 
stamp that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the 
same price. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, 
a depository of value, he alienates in exchange for gold, which 
is the linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for 
another commodity, the Bible, which is destined to enter his 
house as an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. 
The exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamor- 
phoses of opposite yet supplementary character — the conversion 
of the commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the 
money into a commodity. 1 The two phases of this metamor- 
phosis are both of them distinct transactions of the weaver — 
selling, or the exchange of the commodity for money ; buying, 
or the exchange of the money for a commodity ; and, the unity 
of the two acts, selling in order to buy. 

The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, 
is this, that instead of being in possession of the linen, he now 
lias the Bible ; instead of his original commodity, he now 
possesses another of the same value but of different utility. 
In like manner he procures his other means of subsistence and 
means of production. From his point of view, the whole process 
effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the product of 
his labour for the product of some one else s, nothing more than 
an exchange of products. 

The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by 
the following changes in their form. 

Commod i ty — Money — Commodi ty . 
C M C. 

The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the 

B "u J^ rod ...... T&pif &*Tapui(fa<r0ect *d*ra, (pn<ri* o r Hpdx\urof r xal vop 

£:rarrc*v T umip %ptHrov %pnfe&rx xal %pnp.dTc*> ^paro;, 1 (F. Lassalle; Die Philosophic 
Herakleitos de& Dunkeln. Berlin, 1845. Vol. 1, p. 222. ) Lassalle, in his note on 
this passage, p. 224, n. 3- r erroneously make* gold a mere symbol ©f value. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 79 

objects themselves, C — C, the exchange of one commodity for 
another, the circulation of materialised social labour. When 
this result is attained, the process is at an end. 

C — M, First metamorphosis, or sale. 

The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, 
into the body of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the 
salto mortale of the commodity. If it falls short, then, although 
the commodity itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. 
The social division of labour causes his labour to be as one-sided 
as his wants are many-sided. This is precisely the reason why 
the product of his labour serves him solely as exchange value. 
But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised 
universal equivalent, except by being converted into money. 
That money, however, is in some one else's pocket. In order to 
entice the money out of that pocket, our friend's commodity 
must, above all things, be a use-value to the owner of the 
money. For this, it is necessary that the labour expended upon 
it, be of a kind that is socially useful, of a kind that constitute* 
a branch of the social division of labour. But division of labour 
is a system of production which has grown up spontaneously 
and continues to grow behind the backs of the producers. The 
commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the product of 
some new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly arisen 
requirements, or even to give rise itself to new requirements. A 
particular operation, though yesterday, perhaps, forming one out 
of the many operations conducted by one producer in creating a 
given commodity,may to-day separate itself from this connection, 
may establish itself as an independent branch of labour and send 
its incomplete product to market as an independent cornmodit}\ 
The circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation. 
To-day the product satisfies asocial want. To-morrow the article 
may, either altogether or partially, be superseded by some other 
appropriate product. Moreover, although our weaver's labour 
may be a recognised branch of the social division of labour, 
yet that fact is by no means sufficient to guarantee the utility 
of his 20 yards of linen. If the community's want of linen, ami 
such a want has a Limit like every other want, should already 



So Capitalist Production. 

be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our friend's 
product is superfluous, redundant, and consequentl}' useless. 
Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, our 
friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making 
presents. But suppose his product turn out a real use- value, 
and thereby attracts money ? The question arises, how much 
will it attract ? No doubt the answer is already anticipated 
in the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of 
its value. We leave out of consideration here any accidental 
miscalculation of value by our friend, a mistake that is soon 
rectified in the market. We suppose him to have spent on his 
product only that amount of labour-time that is on an average 
socially necessary. The price then, is merely the money-name 
of the quantity of social labour realised in his commodity. But 
without the leave, and behind the back, of our weaver, the 
old fashioned mode of weaving undergoes a change. The labour- 
time that yesterday was without doubt socially necessary to 
the production of a yard of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact 
which the owner of the money is only too eager to prove from 
the prices quoted by our friend's competitors. Unluckily for 
him, weavers are not few and far between. Lastly, suppose 
that every piece of linen in the market contains no more labour- 
time than is socially necessary. In spite of this, all these pieces 
taken as a whole, may have had superfluous labour-time spent 
upon them. If the market cannot stomach the whole quantity 
at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this proves that too 
great a portion of the total labour of the community has been 
expended in the form of weaving. The effect is the same as if 
each individual weaver had expended more labour- time upon 
his particular product than is socially necessaiy. Here we may 
say, with the German proverb : caught together, hung together. 
All the linen in the market counts but as one article of commerce, 
of which each piece is only an aliquot part. And as a matter 
of fact, the value also of each single }-ard is but the materialised 
form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homo- 
geneous human labour. 

We see then, commodities are in love with money, but " the 
course of true love never did run smooth." The quantitative 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 81 

division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spon- 
taneous and accidental manner as its qualitative division. The 
owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same divi- 
sion of labour that turns them into independent private 
producers, also frees the social process of production and the 
relations of the individual producers to each other within that 
process, from all dependence on the will of those producers, 
and that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is 
supplemented by a system ot general and mutual dependence 
through or by means of the products. 

The division of labour converts the product of labour into a 
commodity, and thereby makes necessary its further conversion 
into money. At the same time it also makes the accomplish- 
ment of this trans-substantiation quite accidental. Here, how- 
ever, we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its 
integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be normal. 
Moreover, if the conversion take place at all, that is, if the 
commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis 
does take place although the price realised may be abnormally 
above or below the value. 

The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer 
has his gold replaced by a commodity. The fact which here 
stares us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards 
of linen and £2, have changed hands and places, in other words, 
that they have been exchanged. But for what is the com- 
modity exchanged? For the shape assumed by its own value, 
for* the universal equivalent. And for what is the gold 
exchanged ? For a particular form of its own use-value. 
Why does gold take the form of money face to face with the 
linen ? Because the linen's price of £2, its denomination in 
money, has already equated the linen to gold in its character 
of money. A commodity strips off its original commodity-form 
on being alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually 
attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its price. 
The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value- 
form, is therefore at the same time the realisation of the ideal 
use-value of money; the conversion of a commodity into 

money, is the simultaneous conversion of money into a com- 

w 



82 Capitalist Production. 

modity. The apparently single process is in reality a double 
one. From the pole of the commodity owner it is a sale, from 
the opposite pole of the money owner, it is a purchase. In 
other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M is also M — C. 1 

Up to this point we have considered men in only one econo- 
mical capacity, that of owners of commodities, a capacity in 
which they appropriate the produce of the labour of others, by 
alienating that of their own labour. Hence, for one commodity 
owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, 
either, that the product of the labour of the latter person, the 
buyer, should be in itself money, should be gold, the material 
of which money consists, or that his product should already 
have changed its skin and have stripped off its original form 
of a useful object. In order that it may play the part of 
money, gold must of course enter the market at some point or 
other. This point is to be found at the source of production 
of the metal, at which place gold is bartered, as the immediate 
product of labour, for some other product of equal value. 
From that moment it always represents the realised price of 
some commodity. 2 Apart from its exchange for other com- 
modities at the source of its production, gold, in whose-so-ever 
hands it may be, is the transformed shape of some commodity 
alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or of the first 
metamorphosis C — M. 3 Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, 
or a measure of values, in consequence of all commodities 
measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally 
with their natural shape as useful objects, and making it the 
shape of their value. It became real money, by the general 
alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with their 
natural forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality 
the embodiment of their values. When they assume this 
money-shape, commodities strip off every trace of their natural 
use-value, and of the particular kind of labour to which they 

1 "Toute vente est achat." (Dr. Quesnay : "Dialogues sur le Commerce et les 
Travaux des Artisans." Physiocrates ed. Daire I. Partie, Paris, 184G, p. 170), or as 
Quesnay in his " Maximes generates " puts it, " Vendre est acheter." 

2 " Le prix d'une marchandise nepouvant etre paye que par le prix d'une autre mar- 
chandise." (Mercier de la Riviere : " L'Ordre naturel et essentiel des societes poli- 
tiques." Physiocrates, ed. Daire II. Partie, p. 554). 

a "Pour avoir cet argent, il faut avoir vendu," 1. c, p. 543. 



Money, or the Circtdation of Commodities. 83 

owe their creation, in order to transform themselves into the 
uniform, socially recognised incarnation of homogeneous human 
labour. We cannot tell from the mere look of a piece of 
money, for what particular commodity it has been exchanged. 
Under their money-form all commodities look alike. Hence, 
money may be dirt, although dirt is not money. We will 
assume that the two gold pieces, in consideration of which our 
weaver has parted with his linen, are the metamorphosed shape 
of a quarter of wheat. The sale of the linen, C — M, is at the 
same time its purchase, M — C. But the sale is the first act of 
a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite nature, 
namely, the purchase of a Bible ; the purchase of the linen, on 
the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transac- 
tion of an opposite nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. 
C — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of C — M — C 
(linen — money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last 
phase of another movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). 
The first metamorphosis of one commodity, its transforma- 
tion from a commodity into money, is therefore also invariably 
the second metamorphosis of some other commodity, the re- 
transformation of the latter from money into a commodit} 7 . 1 

M — C, or purchase. The second and concluding metamor- 
phosis of a commodity. 

Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other 
commodities, the result of their general alienation, for this 
reason it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. 
It reads all prices backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself 
in the bodies of all other commodities, which offer to it the 
material for the realisation of its own use-value. At the same 
time the prices, wooing glances cast at money by commodities, 
define the limits of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. 
Since every commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a 
commodity, it is impossible to tell from the money itself, how 
it got into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been 
changed into it. Non olet, from whatever source it may come 

1 As before remarked, the actual producer of gold or silver forms an except ion. I [# 
exchanges his product directly for another commodity, without having hist sold it. 



84 Capitalist Production. 

Representing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents 
on the other a commodity to be bought. 1 

M — C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C — M, a sale ; the con- 
cluding metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamor- 
phosis of another. With regard to our weaver, the life of his 
commodity ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted 
his £2. But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2 set 
free by the weaver into brandy. M — C, the concluding phase 
of C — M — C (linen, money, Bible), is also C — M, the first phase 
of C — M — C (Bible, money, brandy). The producer of a par- 
ticular commodity has that one article alone to offer ; this he 
sells very often in large quantities, but his many and various 
wants compel him to split up the price realised, the sum of 
money set free, into numerous purchases. Hence a sale leads 
to many purchases of various articles. The concluding meta- 
morphosis of a commodity thus constitutes an aggregation of 
first metamorphoses of various other commodities. 

If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a com- 
modity, as a whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made 
up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and 
M — C. These two antithetical transmutations of a commodity 
are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part 
of the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character 
of the economical parts played by him. As the person who 
makes a sale, he is a seller ; as the person who makes a pur- 
chase, he is a buyer. But just as, upon every such transmu- 
tation of a commodity, its two forms, commodity-form and 
money -form, exist simultaneously but at opposite poles, so 
every seller has a buyer opposed to him, and every buyer a 
seller. While one particular commodity is going through its 
two transmutations in succession, from a commodity into 
money and from money into another commodity, the owner of 
the commodity changes in succession his part from that of 
seller to that of buyer. These characters of seller and buyer 
are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to 
the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities. 

1 " Si l'argent represente, dans nos mains, les choses que nous pouvons desirer 
d'nclietor, il y represente aussi les choses que nous avons vendues pour cet ardent .'' 
pfcrcier de la Riviere 1. c. p. 58G.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 85 

The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest 
form, implies four extremes, and three dramatis persons. 
First, a commodity comes face to face with money ; the latter 
is the form taken by the value of the former, and exists in all 
its hard reality, in the pocket of the buyer. A commodity - 
owner is thus brought into contact with a possessor of money. 
So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed into 
money, the money becomes its transient equivalent- form, the 
us3-value of which equivalent-form is to be found in the 
bodies of other commodities. Money, the final term of the 
first transmutation, is at the same time the starting point for 
the second. The person who is a seller in the first transac- 
tion thus becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third 
commodity- owner appears on the scene as a seller. 1 

The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the 
metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular 
movement, a circuit : commodity-form, stripping off of this 
form, and return to the commodity-form. No doubt, the com- 
modity appears here under two different aspects. At the start- 
ing point it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing 
point it is. So, too, the money appears in the first phase as a 
solid crystal of value, a crystal into which the commodity 
eagerly solidifies, and in the second, dissolves into the mere 
transient equivalent-form destined to be replaced by a use- 
value. 

The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the 
same time two inverse partial metamorphoses of two other 
commodities. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the 
scries of its own metamorphoses, and completes the metamor- 
phosis of another (the wheat). In the first phase or sale, the linen 
plays these two parts in its own person. But, then, changed 
into gold, it completes its own second and final metamorphosis, 
and helps at the same time to accomplish the first metamor- 
phosis of a third commodity. Hence the circuit made by one 
commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably 
mixed up with the circuits of other commodities. The total 

1 " U y a tionc . . . quatrt termet et troia oontntetantt, dont Von Intorrient deux 

fuih." (Li Trosnu 1. c. i>. ( J0'.».) 



86 Capitalist Production. 

of all the different circuits constitutes the circulation of com- 
modities. 

The circulation of commodities differs from the direct ex- 
change of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance. 
Only consider the course of events. The weaver has, as a 
matter of fact, exchanged his linen for a Bible, his own com- 
modity for that of some one else. But this is true only so far 
as he himself is concerned. The seller of the Bible, who prefers 
something to warm his inside, no more thought of exchanging 
his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been 
exchanged for his linen. B's commodity replaces that of A, 
but A and B do not mutually exchange those commodities. 
It may, of course, happen that A and B make simultaneous 
purchases, the one from the other ; but such exceptional trans- 
actions are by no means the necessary result of the general con- 
ditions of the circulation of commodities. We see here, on 
the one hand, how the exchange of commodities breaks through 
all local and personal bounds inseparable from direct barter, and 
develops the circulation of the products of social labour ; and 
on the other hand, how it develops a whole network of social 
relations spontaneous in their growth and entirely beyond the 
control of the actors. It is only because the farmer has sold 
his wheat that the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, only 
because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is 
enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold 
the water of everlasting life that the distiller is enabled to sell 
his eau-de-vie, and so on. 

The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct 
barter of products, become extinguished upon the use values 
changing places and hands. The money does not vanish on 
dropping out of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given 
commodity. It is constantly being precipitated into new 
places in the arena of circulation vacated by other commodities. 
In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example, linen — 
money — Bible, the linen first faljs out of circulation, and money 
steps into its place. Then the Bible falls out of circulation, and 
again money takes its place. When one commodity replaces 
another, the money commodity always sticks to the hands of 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. &? 

some third person. * Circulation sweats money from every 
pore. 

Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because 
every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore 
the circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equili- 
brium of sales and purchases. If this means that the number 
of actual sales is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere 
tautology. But its real purport is to prove that every seller 
brings his buyer to market with him. Nothing of the kind. 
The sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an 
exchange between a commodity-owner and an owner of money, 
between two persons as opposed to each other as the two poles 
of a magnet. They form two distinct acts, of polar and 
opposite characters, when performed by one single person. 
Hence the identity of sale and purchase implies that the 
commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the alchemistical 
retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the shape 
of money; if, in other words, it cannot be sold by its owner, and 
therefore be bought by the owner of the money. That identity 
further implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes 
a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the life of the 
commodity. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is 
at once a sale and a purchase, it is also an independent process 
in itself. The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the 
money, i.e., a commodity ready to go into circulation at any 
time. No one can sell unless some one else purchases. But no 
one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has just sold. 
Circulation bursts through all restrictions as to time, place, and 
individuals, imposed by direct barter, and this it effects by 
Bplitting up, into the antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the 
direct identity that in barter does exist between the alienation 
of one's own and the acquisition of some other man's product. 
To say that these two independent and antithetical acts have 

an intrinsic unity, are essentially one, is tin- same as t«» say 
th.it. this intrinsic oneness expresses itself in an externa! 

antithesis. If the interval in time between the two coinple- 

1 S, If -«-\ iili-nt fia this may he, it is MTtrthaleM for the HHMt pirt BnobMTTed bj 

politic*] economists, *nd i ipei i.illy l>y the " I i< ■■ tndei \ olgfti tab' 1 



88 Capitalist Production. 

mentary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a commodity 
become too great, if the split between the sale and the purchase 
become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them, 
their oneness, asserts itself by producing — a crisis. The 
antithesis, use- value and value ; the contradictions that private 
labour is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a 
particularized concrete kind of labour has to pass for abstract 
human labour; the contradiction between the personification 
of objects and the representation of persons by things ; all these 
antitheses and contradictions, which are immanent in com- 
modities, assert themselves, and develop their modes of motion, 
in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity. 
These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than 
the possibility, of crises. The conversion of this mere possibility 
into a reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, 
horn our present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet 
no existence. * 

b The currency' 1 of money. 

The change of form, C — M — C, by which the circulation of 
the material products of labour is brought about, requires that 
a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the pro- 
cess, and shall, also in the shape of a commodity, end it. The 
movement of the commodity is therefore a circuit. On the 
other hand, the form of this movement precludes a circuit from 

1 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. 74-76. "With regard 
to this subject, we may notice two methods characteristic of apologetic economy. The 
first is the identification of the circulation of commodities with the direct barter of 
products, by simple abstraction from their points of difference ; the second is, the 
attempt to explain away the contradictions of capitalist production, by reducing the 
relations between the persons engaged in that mode of production, to the simple rela- 
tions arising out of the circulation of commodities. The production and circulation 
of commodities are, however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in 
modes of production the most diverse. If we are acquainted with nothing but the 
abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these modes of production, 
we cannot possibly know anything of the specific ooints of difference of those modes, 
nor pronounce any judgment upon them. In no science is such a big fuss made with 
commonplace truisms as in political economy. For instance, J. B. Say sets himself 
up as a judge of crises, because, forsooth, he knows that a commodity is a product. 

2 Translator's note. — This word is here used in its original signification of the 
course or track pursued by money as it changes from hand to hand, a course which 
essentially differs from circulation. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 89 

being made by the money. The result is not the return of the 
money, but its continued removal further and further away 
from its starting-point. So long as the seller sticks fast to his 
money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that 
commodity is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and 
has completed only half its course. But so soon as he com- 
pletes the process, so soon as he supplements his sale by a pur- 
chase, the money again leaves the hands of its possessor. It 
is true that if the weaver, after buying the Bible, sell more linen, 
money comes back into his hands. But this return is not 
owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen ; that cir- 
culation resulted in the money getting into the hands of the 
seller of the Bible. The return of monev into the hands of the 
weaver is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of 
the process of circulation with a fresh commodity, which 
renewed process ends with the same result as its predecessor 
did. Hence the movement directly imparted to money by the 
circulation of commodities takes the form of a constant motion 
away from its starting-point, of a course from the hands of one 
commodity owner into those of another. This course consti- 
tutes its currency (cours de la monnaie). 

The currency of money is the constant and monotonous re- 
petition of the same process. The commodity is always in the 
hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always 
in the hands of the buyer. And money serves as a means of 
purchase by realising the price of the commodity. This reali- 
sation transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer, 
and removes the money from the hands of the buyer into those 
of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with 
another commodity. That this one-sided character of the 
money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the 
Commodity's motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over. The 

very nature of the circulation of commodities begets the op- 
posite appearance. The first metamorphosis of a commodity is 

visibly, not only tin; money's movement, but also that of the 

commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on the con- 
trary, the movement appeals to us as the movement of the 
money alone. In the fust phase of its circulation the corn- 



90 Capitalist Production. 

modity changes place with the money. Thereupon the com- 
modity, under its aspect of a useful object, falls out of 
circulation into consumption. 1 In its stead we have its value- 
shape — the money. It then goes through the second phase of 
its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the 
shape of money. The continuity of the movement is therefore 
kept up by the money alone, and the same movement that as 
regards the commodity consists of two processes of an anti- 
thetical character, is, when considered as the movement of 
the money, always one and the same process, a continued 
change of places with ever fresh commodities. Hence the 
result brought about by the circulation of commodities, namely, 
the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the appear- 
ance of having been effected not by means of the change of 
form of the commodities, but rather b} 7 the money acting as a 
medium of circulation, by an action that circulates commodi- 
ties, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and transfers 
them from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in 
which they are use-values ; and that in a direction constantly 
opposed to the direction of the money. The latter is con- 
tinually withdrawing commodities from circulation and step- 
ping into their places, and in this way continually moving 
further and further from its starting-point. Hence, although 
the movement of the money is merely the expression of 
the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be 
the actual fact, and the circulation of commodities seems to be 
the result of the movement of the money. 2 

Again, money functions as a means of circulation, only 
because in it the values of commodities have independent 
reality. Hence its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, 
in fact, merely the movement of commodities while changing 
their forms. This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible 
in the currency of money. The twofold change of form in a 

1 Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon that at 
present has no existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the last time, out of 
the sphere of circulation into that of consumption, where it serves either as means of 
subsistence or means of production. 

2 "II (l'argent) n'a d'autre mouvement que celui qui lui est imprim6 par les pro- 
ductions." (Le Trosne l.c.p. 885.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 9 1 

commodity is reflected in the twice repeated change of place of 
the same piece of money during the complete metamorphosis of 
a commodity, and in its constantly repeated change of place, 
as metamorphosis follows metamorphosis, and each becomes 
interlaced with the others. 

The linen, for instance, first of all exchanges its commodity- 
form for its money-form. The last term of its first metamor- 
phosis (C — M), or the money-form, is the first term of its final 
metamorphosis (M — C), of its re-conversion into a useful commo- 
dity, the Bible. But each of these changes of form is accom- 
plished by an exchange between commodity and money, by 
their reciprocal displacement. The same pieces of coin, in the 
first act, changed places with the linen, in the second, with the 
Bible. They are displaced twice. The first metamorphosis 
puts them into the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out 
of it. The two inverse changes undergone by the same com- 
modity are reflected in the displacement, twice repeated, but 
in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin. 

If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is 
gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a 
given piece of money changes its place only once. Its second 
change corresponds to and expresses the second metamorphosis 
of the commodity, its re-conversion from money into another 
commodity intended for use. It is a matter of course, that all 
this is applicable to the simple circulation of commodities 
alone, the only form that we are now considering. 

Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and 
undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of 
circulation again and to be replaced by other commodities. 
Money, on the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps 
continually within the sphere of circulation, and moves about 
in it. The question therefore arises, how much money this 
Bphere constantly absorbs . ; 

In ;i given country there take place every day at tli-' sai 
time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamor- 
phoses "l* commodities, or, in other words, numerous Bales and 
numerous purcha e The commodities are equated before- 
hand in imagination, by their pri<-< -, to definite quantitie 



92 Capitalist Production. 

money. And since, in the form of circulation now under con- 
sideration, money and commodities always come bodily face to 
face, one at the positive pole of purchase, the other at the 
negative pole of sale, it is clear that the amount of the means 
of circulation required, is determined beforehand by the sum of 
the prices of all these commodities. As a matter of fact, the 
money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold ideally 
expressed beforehand by the sum of the prices of the com- 
modities. The equality of these two sums is therefore self- 
evident. We know, however, that, the values of commodities 
remaining constant, their prices vary with the value of gold 
(the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and 
falling in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of 
such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of 
commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency 
must fall or rise to the same extent. The change in the 
quantity of the circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, 
caused by the money itself, yet not in virtue of its function 
as a medium of circulation, but of its function as a measure of 
value. First, the price of the commodities varies inversely 
as the value of the money, and then the quantity of the 
medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the 
commodities. Exactly the same thing would happen if, for 
instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were replaced 
by silver as the measure of value, or if, instead of the value of 
silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being the 
measure of value. In the one case, more silver would be 
current than gold was before ; in the other case, less gold 
would be current than silver was before. In each case the 
value of the material of money, i.e., the value of the com- 
modity that serves as the measure of value, would have under- 
gone a change, and therefore so, too, would the prices of com- 
modities which express their values in money, and so, too, 
would the quantity of money current whose function it is to 
realise those prices. We have already seen, that the sphere of 
circulation has an opening through which gold (or the material 
of money generally) enters into it as a commodity with a given 
value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities* 93 

measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already 
determined. If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced 
by a change in the prices of those commodities that are 
directly bartered for the precious metals at the sources of 
their production. The greater part of all other commodities, 
especially in the imperfectly developed stages of civil society, 
will continue for a long time to be estimated by the former 
antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. 
Nevertheless, one commodity infects another through their 
common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed in gold 
or in silver, gradually settle down into the proportions deter- 
mined by their comparative values, until finally the values of 
all commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the 
metal that constitutes money. This process is accompanied by 
the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, 
an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles 
directly bartered for them at their sources of production. In 
proportion therefore as commodities in general acquire their 
true prices, in proportion as their values become estimated 
according to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the 
same proportion the quantity of that metal necessary for realis- 
ing those new prices is provided beforehand. A one-sided 
observation of the results that followed upon the discovery of 
fresh supplies of gold and silver, led some economists in the 
17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false con- 
elusion, that the prices of commodities had gone up in conse- 
quence of the increased quantity of gold and silver serving as 
means of circulation. Henceforth we shall consider the value 
of gold to be given, as, in fact, it is momentarily whenever we 
estimate the price of a commodity. 

On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of 
circulation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to 
be realised. II' now we furthei Buppose the price <>f r;i<-li com- 
modity t<> be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends <>n 
the mass of commodities in circulation. It requires bul little 
packing of brains to comprehend that if one quarter of wh 
E2, 100 quarters will cost 6200, _<><> quarters 6400, and 

ort, thai consequently the quantity of money thai chan 



94 Capitalist Production. 

place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the quan- 
tity of that wheat. 

If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of 
circulating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of 
those commodities. It increases and diminishes because the 
sum of the prices increases or diminishes in consequence of the 
change of price. To produce this effect, it is by no means 
requisite that the prices of all commodities should rise or fall 
simultaneously. A rise or a fall in the prices of a number of 
leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to inciease, in the 
other to diminish, the sum of the prices of all commodities, 
and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. 
Whether the change in the price correspond to an actual 
change of value in the commodities, or whether it be the result 
of mere fluctuations in market prices, the effect on the quan- 
tity of the medium of circulation remains the same. 

Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially meta- 
morphosed simultaneously in different localities : say, one 
quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of 
brandy. If the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the 
prices to be realised be consequently £8, it follows that £8 in 
money must go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these 
same articles are links in the following chain of metamorphoses : 
1 quarter of wheat — £2 — 20 yards of linen — £2 — 1 Bible — 
£2 — 4 gallons of brandy — £2, a chain that is already well- 
known to us, in that case the £2 cause the different com- 
modities to circulate one after the other, and after realizing 
their prices successively, and therefore the sum of those prices, 
£8, they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. The 
£2 thus make four moves. This repeated change of place of the 
same pieces of money corresponds to the double change in form 
of the commodities, to their motion in opposite directions 
through two stages of circulation, and to the interlacing of the 
metamorphoses of different commodities. 1 These antithetic and 
complementary phases, of which the process of metamorphosis 

1 " Ce sont les productions qui le (l'argent) mettent en mouvement et le font 
circuler ... La celerite de son mouvement (sc. de l'argent) supplee & sa quantity 
Lorsqu'il en est besoin, il ne fait que glisser d'une main dans Tautre sans s'arreter un 
instant." (Le Trosne 1. c. pp. 915, ( J1G.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 95 

consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but successively. 
Time is therefore required for the completion of the series. 
Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by 
the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a 
given time. Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a 
day. The sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8, 
the number of moves of the two pieces of money is four, and 
the quantity of money circulating is £2. Hence, for a given 
interval of time during the process of circulation, we have the 
following relation : the quantity of money functioning as the 
circulating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the 
commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins 
of the same denomination. This law holds generally. 

The total circulation of commodities in a given country 
during a given period is made up on the one hand of numerous 
isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which 
are at the same time purchases, in which each coin changes its 
j dace only once, or makes only one move ; on the other hand, 
of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running 
side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of 
which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number 
being greater or less according to circumstances. The total 
number of moves made by all the circulating coins of one 
denomination being <dven, we can arrive at the average num.- 
ber of moves made by a single coin of that denomination, or at 
the average velocity of the currency of money. The quantity 
of money thrown into the circulation at the beginning of each 
day is uf course determined by the sum of the prices of all the 
Commodities circulating simultaneously side by .side. But once 
in circulation, coins are, so to say, made responsible for 1 
another. If the one increase its velocity, the other either 
retards its own, or altogether falls out of circulation; 1*",- 1',,^ 
circulation can absorb unly such a quantity of go! t as when 
multiplied by the mean number of moves made by one sin 
coin or element, is equal to the sum of the juices to be 1 
i. Hence if the number of moved made by the Beparate 
, the total number of those pieces in circulation 
dimini he . 11' the number of the moves diminish, the total 



96 Capitalist Production. 

number of pieces increases. Since the quantity of money cap- 
able of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given 
mean velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order t<> 
abstract a given number of sovereigns from the circulation is to 
throw the same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well 
known to all bankers. 

Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but 
a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical 
metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that cur- 
rency reflects the rapidity with which commodities change 
their forms, the continued interlacing of one series of meta- 
morphoses with another, the hurried social interchange of 
matter, the rapid disappearance of commodities from the 
sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substitution of 
fresh ones in their places. Hence, in the velocity of the cur- 
rency we have the fluent unity of the antithetical and com- 
plementary phases, the unity of the conversion of the useful 
aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and their re-con- 
version from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity of the 
two processes of sale and purchase. On the other hand, the 
retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two 
processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the stagna- 
tion in the change of form, and therefore, in the social inter- 
change of matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no 
clue to the origin of this stagnation ; it merely puts in evidence 
the phenomenon itself. The general public, who, simultane- 
ously, with the retardation of the currency, see money appear 
and disappear less frequently at the periphery of circulation, 
naturally attribute this retardation to a quantitative deficiency 
in the circulating medium. 1 

1 Money being. . . the common measure of buying and selling, every body who 
hath anything to sell, and cannot procure chapmen for it, is presently apt to think, 
that want of money in the kingdom, or country, is the cause why his goods do not 
go off ; and so, want of money is the common cry ; which is a great mistake. . . 
What do these people want, who cry out for money? . . . The farmer complains 
... he thinks that were more money in the country, he should have a price for his 
goods. Then it seems money is not his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which 
he would sell, hut cannot. . . Why cannot he get a price ? . . . (1) Either there is 
too much corn and cattil in the country, so that most who come to market have 
need of selling, as he hath, and few of buying ; or ('J) There wants the usual vent 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 97 

The total quantity of money functioning during a given 
period as the circulating medium, is determined, on the one 
hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, 
and on the other hand, by the rapidity with which the anti- 
thetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. On 
this rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the prices 
can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. But the 
sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on 
the quantity, as well as on the prices, of the commodities. 
These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circu- 
lating commodities, and velocity of money-currency, are all 
variable. Hence, the sum of the prices to be realised, and 
consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depend- 
ing on that sum, will vary with the numerous variations of 
these three factors in combination. Of these variations we 
shall consider those alone that have been the most important 
in the history of prices. 

While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulat- 
ing medium may increase owing to the number of circulating 
commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreas- 
ing, or to a combination of the two. On the other hand the 
quantity of the circulating medium may decrease with a 
decreasing number of commodities, or with an increasing 
rapidity of their circulation. 

With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity 
of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the 
Dumber of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally 

abroad l>y transportation. . . ; or (S) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason 
of poverty, do not ipend so much In their houses as formerly they did ; wherefore it 
is not the Increase of ipechlo money, which would at all advance the farmer's g< 
but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down the market. 

. . . The merchant and ihopkei pet want money In the s;une manie 1. thai is, tin y 

want a vent for the goods they deal In, by reason that the markets fail n ... [A 
nation] " never tin is e ib t t--i , than when riohei are tost from hand to hand. " (Sii 
Dudley North : " Discourses upon ftrade," Lond. 1891, pp. 11 L5, passim.) Herrea 
lohwand'i fanciful notions smounl merely to this, thai the antagonism, which 
its origin in the nature of commodi t ies, and is reproduced In their circulation, can 1 . 
removed by men asing the eiroulatlng medium. Bui if, on the one hand, it i» ■ pi 
lar delusion to tserib tion in production and eireulation to insufficient 

the circulating medium, it i>y n<» meant follows, on the other hand, thai 1 

Ity of the medium in oonsequei of bungling legisls>tiv< Lnterfuenoi • 

regulation of currenoy, maynotgivt cation* 

a 



98 Capitalist Production. 

to the incrca.se in their prices, or provided the velocity of 
currency increase at the .same rate as prices rise, the number oi* 
commodities in circulation remaining constant. The quantity 
of the circulating medium may decrease, owing to the number 
of commodities decreasing more rapidly ; or to the velocity oi" 
currency increasing more rapidly, than prices rise. 

With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quantity 
of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the 
number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall in 
price, or provided the velocity of currency decrease in the same 
proportion. The quantity of the circulating medium will 
increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, 
or the rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices 
fall. 

The variations of the different factors may mutually compen- 
sate each other, so that notwithstanding their continued 
instability, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity 
of money in circulation remains constant ; consequently, we 
iind, especially if we take long periods into consideration, that 
the deviations from the average level, of the quantity of money 
current in any country, are much smaller than we should at 
first sight expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations 
periodically arising from industrial and commercial crises, or, 
less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money. 

The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is 
determined by the sum of the prices of the commodities 
circulating, and the average velocity of currency ' may also be 

1 " There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to drive the 
trade of a nation, more or less than which would prejudice the same. Just as there 
is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a small retail trade, to change silver 
money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be adjusted with the smallest silver 
pieces. . . . Now, as the proportion of the number of farthings requisite in com- 
merce is to be taken from the number of people, the frequency of their exchanges : 
M also, and principally, from the value of the smallest silver pieces of money ; so in 
like manner, the proportion of money [gold and silver specie] requisite in our trade, 
is to be likewise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of 
the payments." (William Petty. " A Treatise on Taxes and Contributions." Loud. 
1662, p. 17.) The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks of J. Steuart and 
others, by A. Young, in his "Political Arithmetic," Lond. 1774, in which work there 
is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on quantity of money," at p. 112, sqq. 
I have stated in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. 149: "He (Adam Smith) passes over 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 99 

stated as follows : given the sum of the values of commodities, 
and the average rapidity of their metamorphoses, the quantity 
of precious metal current as money depends on the value of 
that precious metal. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the 
contrary, prices that are determined by the quantity of the 
circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the 
quantity of the precious metals in a country ; l this opinion was 
based by those who first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that 
commodities are without a price, and money without a value, 
when they first enter into circulation, and that, once in the 
circulation, an aliquot part of the medley of commodities is 
exchanged for an aliquot part of the heap of precious metals. 2 

without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in circulation, and treats 
money quite wrongly as a mere commodity." This statement applies only in so far 
as Adam Smith, ex officio, treats of money. Now and then, however, as in his 
criticism of the earlier systems of political economy, he takes the right view. " The 
quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which 
are to be circulated by it. . . . The value of the goods annually bought and sold 
in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and distribute them 
to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. The channel of 
circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any 
more." (" "Wealth of Nations." J;k. IV., ch. I.) In like manner, ex officio, he opens 
his work with an apotheosis on the division of labour. Afterwards, in the last book 
which treats of the sources of public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations 
of the division of labour made by his teacher, A. Ferguson. 

1 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold and silver 
increase amongst the people; and consequently, where the gold and silver deci 
in ;iny nation, the prices of all things must fall propoi I Lonably to such decrease ol 
money." (Jacob Yainlci lint : " Money ansu.-rs all Things." Loud. 1734, p. 6.) A 

careful comparison of this book with Hume's " Essays," proves to my mind without 
doubt that Hume was acquainted with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is 

certainly an important one. The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity 

of the circulating medium, i held byBarbon and other much earlier writers. 

"No inconvenience," says Yanderlint, "can arise l.y an unrestrained trade, but \. i\ 

advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which 
prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the oath will certainly 
And everything advance in prioe, as the cash Increases amongst them. And . . . 
our manufactures, and everything else, will soon become so moderate as bo turn the 
balanoc of trade In our favour, and thereby fetch tin- money back again." (1. o., 
pp. 48, 44.) 

i Thai the prioe of each single kind of oommodity forms a part of the sum of the 
i of all the commodities in circulation, li ■ self evident proposition. But how 
us. •values, which are Inoommensurable with regard to eaoh other, are to '< si 
changed, en masse, foe the total mm of gold and liln r in i oounsry, is 'i 1111, Ib©obi« 
prehensible. if we itart from tie- notion thai all commodities I form one 

■ingle oommodity, of which each is but an aliquot part, we gel the following bee 

i The total oommodity — x cwt. of gold ; commodity a : an aliquot purt of the 



ioo Capitalist Production. 

c. Coin and symbols of value. 

That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function 
as the circulating medium. The weight of gold represented in 
imagination by the prices or money-names of commodities, 
must confront those commodities, within the circulation, in the 
shape of coins or pieces of gold of a given denomination. 
Coining, like the establishment of a standard of prices, is the 
business of the State. The different national uniforms worn 
at home by gold and silver as coins, and doffed again in the 
market of the world, indicate the separation between the 
internal or national spheres of the circulation of commodities, 
and their universal sphere. 

The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is 
one of shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to 
the other. 1 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it 

total commodity = the same aliquot part of x cwt. of gold. This is stated in all 
seriousness by Montesquieu : "Si l'on compare la masse de l'or et de l'argent qui est 
dans le monde avec la somme des marchandises qui y sont, il est certain que chaque 
denree ou marchandise, en particulier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine portion 
de le masse entiere. Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree ou marchandise dans le 
monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule qui s'achete, et qu'elle se divise comme l'argent : 
Cette partie de cette marchandise repondra a une partie de la masse de l'argent ; la 
moitie du total de l'une a la moitie du total de l'autre, &c. . . . l'etablissemen* 
du prix des choses depend toujours fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses 
au total des signes." (Montesquieu 1. c. t III., pp. 12, 13.) As to the further devel- 
opment of this theory by Eicardo and his disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and 
others, see "Zur Kritik," &c, pp. 140-146, and p. 150, sqq. John Stuart Mill, with 
his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view of his 
father, James Mill, and the opposite view. On a comparison of the text of his 
compendium, "Principles of Pol. Econ.," with his preface to the first adition, in 
which preface he announces himself as the Adam Smith of his day — we do not know 
whether to admire more the simplicity of the man, or that of the public, who took 
him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith he announced himself to be, although he bean 
about as much resemblance to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the 
Duke of Wellington. The original researches of Mr. J. S. Mill, which are neither 
extensive nor profound, in the domain of political economy, will be found mustered 
in rank and file in his little work, " Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy," 
which appeared in 1844. Locke asserts point blank the connexion between the 
absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination of their values by quantity 
alone, "Mankind having consented to put an imaginary value upon gold and silver 
. . . the intriusick value, regarded in these metals, is nothing but the quantity.'' 
("Some considerations, "&c, 1G91, Works Ed. 1777, vol. II., p. 15.) 

1 It lies, of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into consideration such 
details as the seigniorage on minting. I will, however, cite for the benefit of tho 
romantic sycophant, Adam Miiller, who admires the "generous liberality" with 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 101 

immediately finds 'tself on the high-road to the melting pot. 
During their currency, coins wear away, some more, others 
less. Name and substance, nominal weight and real weight, 
begin their process of separation. Coins of the same denom- 
ination become different in value, because they are different in 
weight. The weight of gold fixed upon as the standard of 
prices, deviates from the weight that serves as the circulating 
medium, and the latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real 
equivalent of the commodities whose prices it realises. The 
history of coinage during the middle ages and down into the 
18th century, records the ever renewed confusion arising from 
this cause. The natural tendency of circulation to convert 
coins into a mere semblance of what they profess to be, into a 
symbol of the weight of metal they are officially supposed to 
contain, is recognised by modern legislation, which fixes the 
loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a gold coin, or to make 
it no longer le^al tender. 

The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation 
between their nominal and their real weight, creating a dis- 
tinction between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, 
and as coins with a definite function on the other — this fact 
implies the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by 
tokens of some other material, by symbols serving the same 
purposes as coins. The practical difficulties in the way of 
coining extremely minute quantities of gold or silver, and the 
circumstance that at first the less precious metal is used as a 
measure of value instead of the more precious, copper instead 
of silver, silver instead of gold, and that the less precious 
circulates as money until dethroned by the more precious — all 
these facts explain the parts historically played by silver and 

which the English (iovernment coins gratuitously, the following opinion of Sir 

Dudhy North: "Silrer and fold] like other oommoditiet, hers their ebbinga and 
Sowings. Upon the arrival of quantities from Spain . . . ttisoarried intoths 

r, and ooined. Not long after there will come a demand for bullion to be 
• [ported again. If there is none, but all happens to be In coin, what then ? Hell It 

down again ; there's no loss in it, for the OOining costs the owner nothing. Thus the 

nation has been ab d made to pay for the twisting of itrawforaei 

if the men hunt were mads to pay the i inc.- of tie ooinage, he would noi bars a nt l>is 
to the Tower without consideration ; and coined money would always keep a ralue 

abort Onooined silver." (North, 1. a>, p, IS.) North was himself one of the foremost 
im-i chants in the reign of Charles II. 



102 Capitalist Production. 

copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins. Silver and copper 
tokens take the place of gold in those regions of the circulation 
where coins pass from hand to hand most rapidly, and are 
subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. This occurs 
where sales and purchases on a very small scale are continually 
happening. In order to prevent these satellites from establish- 
ing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive 
enactments determine the extent to which they must be com- 
pulsorily received as payment instead of gold. The particular 
tracks pursued by the different species of coin in currency, run 
naturally into each other. The tokens keep company with 
gold, to pay fractional parts of the smallest gold coin ; gold is, 
on the one hand, constantly pouring into retail circulation, and 
on the other hand is as constantly being thrown out again by 
bein^ changed into tokens. x 

The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is 
arbitrarily fixed by law. When in currency, they wear away 
even more rapidly than gold coins. Hence their functions are 
totally independent of their weight, and consequently of all 
value. The function of gold as coin becomes completely inde- 
pendent of the metallic value of that gold. Therefore things 
that are relatively without value, such as paper notes, can 
serve as coins in its place. This purely symbolic character is 
to a certain extent masked in metal tokens. In paper money 
it stands out plainly. In fact, ce n'est que le premier pas qui 
coiite. 

We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by 
the State and having compulsory circulation. It has its 
immediate origin in the metallic currency. Money based upon 
credit implies on the other hand conditions, which, from our 

1 " If silver never exceed what is wanted for the smaller payments, it cannot he 
collected in sufficient quantities for the larger payments . . . the use of gold in 
the main payments necessarily implies also its use in the retail trade : those who 
have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and receiving with the commodity 
purchased a balance of silver in return ; by which means the surplus of silver that 
would otherwise encumber the retail dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general 
circulation. But if there is as much silver as will transact the small payments in- 
dependent of gold, the retail trader must then receive silver for small purchases ; 
and it must of necessity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan. " Inquiry into 
the Taxation and Commercial Policy of Great Britain." Edinburgh, 1844, pp. 2 18, 24'J.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 10 



v^ 



standpoint of the simple circulation of commodities, are as yet 
totally unknown to us. But we may affirm this much, that 
just as true paper money takes its rise in the function of money 
as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes 
root spontaneously in the function of money as the means of 
payment 1 

The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their 
various denominations, say £1, £5, &c, are printed. In so far 
as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount. 
their movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency 
of money itself. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper 
money can spring up only from the proportion in which that 
paper money represents gold. Such a law exists ; stated 
dimply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must no< 
exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the case may be) which 
would actually circulate if not replaced by symbols. Now the 
quantity of gold which the circulation can absorb, constantly 
fluctuates about a given level. Still, the mass of the circulating 
medium in a given country never sinks below a certain 
minimum easily ascertained by actual experience. The fact 
that this minimum mass continually undergoes changes in its 
constituent parts, or that the pieces of gold of which it consists 
are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, causes of course no 
change either in its amount or in the continuity of its circula- 
tion. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols. If, on 
the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day filled 
with paper money to the full extent of their capacity for 
1 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, took it into 

his liiad one 'lay to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal that secretly aimed at 

converting th au&gnatU of the empire into convertible banli notes. Theassignati 

Committee, in it* report of April, L854, gives him a nabbing. Whether h< 

• l il:> traditional drubbing with bambooe is not itated. Tin' concluding 

miO of thc-i'. follows:- "The Committee bai carefully examined his pro- 

and flndi thai it is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advai 
srttl i i the crown." (Arbeiten der Eaiserlich Etussisohen Qrsanritsnhal 

Peking ufa I kui dem Etc risohenvon l>r. C Abel and V. A. Rfecklenl 

1 d i'- ■ Lin, '.'■:• Id n< t ••• (ore tin- < lommitl 

Lordi on th< Bank Acts, a governor of the Hank of ] 
l to tii.' abrasion of gold <"ins during i l 

o light. The olasi irhioh one bases srith full weight, 

•h by ire m and t- ar to draw I 
I -I I 18, I. 129.) 



104 Capitalist Product ion. 

absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in 
consequence of a fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. 
There would no longer be any standard. If the paper money 
exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of 
the like denomination that can actually be current, it would, 
apart from the danger of falling into general disrepute, re- 
present only that quantity of gold, which, in accordance with 
the laws of the circulation of commodities, is required, and is 
alone capable of being represented by paper. If the quantity 
of paper money issued be double what it ought to be, then, as 
a matter of fact, £1 would be the money-name not of \ of an 
ounce, but of \ of an ounce of gold. The effect would be the 
same as if an alteration had taken place in the function of gold 
as a standard of prices. Those values that were previously 
expressed by the price of £1 would now be expressed by the 
price of £2. 

Paper-money is a token representing gold or money. The 
relation between it and the values of commodities is this, that 
the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold 
that are s3 7 mbolically represented by the paper. Only in so 
far as paper-money represents gold, which like all other com- 
modities has value, is it a symbol of value. ■ 

Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being 
replaced by tokens that have no value ? But, as we have 
already seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far 
as it functions exclusive^ 7 as coin, or as the circulating 
medium, and as nothing else. Now, money has other functions 
besides this one, and the isolated function of serving as the 
mere circulating medium is not necessarily the only one 

1 The following passage from Fullarton shows the want of clearness on the part of 
even the best writers on money, in their comprehension of its various functions : 
"That, as far as concerns our domestic exchanges, all the monetary functions which 
are usually performed by gold and silver coins, may be performed as effectually by a 
circulation of inconvertible notes, having no value but that factitious and conven- 
tional value they derive from the law, is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no 
denial. Value of this description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic 
value, and supersede even the necessity for a standard, provided only the quantity 
of issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullarton: " Regulation of Currencies," 
London, 1844, p. 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is capable 
of being replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore its functions as 
a, measure of value and a standard of prices are declared to be superfluous ' 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities, icy 



attached to s:old coin, although this is the case with those 
abraded coins that continue to circulate. Each piece of money 
is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only so long as it actually 
circulates. But this is just the case with that minimum mass 
of gold, which is capable of being replaced by paper-money. 
That mass remains constantly within the sphere of circulation, 
continually functions as a circulating medium, and exists ex- 
clusively for that purpose. Its movement therefore represents 
nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse phases of 
the metamorphosis C — M — C, phases in which commodities con- 
front their value-forms, only to disappear again immediately. 
The independent existence of the exchange value of a com- 
modity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the 
commodity is immediately replaced by another commodity. 
Hence, in this process which continually makes money pass 
from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money 
suffices. Its functional existence absorbs, so to say, its 
material existence. Being a transient and objective reflex of 
the prices of commodities, it serves only as a symbol of itself, 
and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token. ■ One 
thing is, however, requisite ; this token must have an objective 
social validity of its own, and this the paper symbol acquires 
by its forced currency. This compulsory actiun of the 
State can take effect only within that inner sphere of circula- 
tion which is CO-terminous with the territories of the com- 
munity, but it is also only within that sphere that money 
completely responds to its function of being the circulating 
medium, or becomes coin. 

HCTZOM 3. — MONEY. 

The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, 

1 from the fat that fold ami silver, so far as tiny IN coins, or BXolusfa ly 
as tin: medium of circulation, MOOOM DMN tokens of t lnins.lv. s, Nioholai BorbOD 

dodoooi the right of Qorommonti "to raise money," that i«, to give to the weight of 

Milver that i.s called a lhilling the name <.f | gri at. r w. Ight, such as a OfOU n j and so 

to pay orediton shillings, instead <>t crowns. "Money does wear and grow lighter 
by often telling ores ... It in the denominntion SAd ourrenoy of the money 
that men regard In bargaining, and not the. quantity of ittvei 

public authoiity upon the metal that iuak--s it money.'' (N. Bilbos, 1. c, pp. V 



io6 Capitalist Production. 

cither in its own person or by a representative, as the mediura 
of circulation, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. 
It functions as money, on the one hand, when it has t<j be 
present in its own golden person. It is then the money -com- 
modity, neither merely ideal, as in its function of a measure 
of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function of 
circulating medium. On the other hand, it also functions as 
money, when by virtue of its function, whether that function 
be performed in person or by representative, it congeals into the 
sole form of value, the only adequate form of existence of 
exchange-value, in opposition to use- value, represented by all 
other commodities. 

a. Hoarding. 

The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical 
metamorphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation 
of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of 
money, or in the function that money performs of a perpetuum 
mobile of circulation. But so soon as the series of metamor- 
phoses is interrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by 
subsequent purchases, money ceases to be mobilised ; it is trans- 
formed, as Boisguillebert says, from "meuble" into "im- 
meuble," from movable into immovable, from coin into 
money. 

With the very earliest development of the circulation of 
commodities, there is also developed the necessity, and the 
passionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamor- 
phosis. This product is the transformed shape of the com- 
modity, or its gold-chrysalis. x Commodities are thus sold not 
for the purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their 
commodity-form by their money-form. From being the mere 
means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change 
of form becomes the end and aim. The changed form of the 
commodity is thus prevented from functioning as its uncondi- 
tionally alienable form, or as its merely transient money-form. 

1 " Une richesse en argent n'est que . . . richesse en productions, converties 
en urgent. 1 ' (Mercier de la Kiviere, 1. c.) "Une valeur en productions n'a fait que 
changer do forme." (Id., p. 480.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 107 

The money becomes petrified into a hoard, and the seller 
becomes a hoarder of money. 

In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is 
the surplus use-values alone that are converted into money. 
Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions 
for superfluity or wealth. This naive form of hoarding be- 
comes perpetuated in those communities in which the tra- 
ditional mode of production is carried on for the supply of a 
fixed and limited circle of home wants. It is thus with the 
people of Asia, and particularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, 
who fancies that the prices of commodities in a country are 
determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in 
it, asks himself why Indian commodities are so cheap. An- 
swer: Because the Hindoos bury their money. From 1602 to 
1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions of pounds sterling 
of silver, which originally came from America to Europe. 1 In 
the 10 years from 1850 to 18GG, England exported to India 
and China £120,000,000 in silver, which had been received in 
exchange for Australian gold. Most of the silver exported to 
( 'liina makes its way to India. 

As the production of commodities further developes, every 
producer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the 
nexus rerum or the social pledge.- His wants are constantly 
making themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase 
of* other people's commodities, while the production and sale of 
his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances 
In order then to be able to buy without selling, he must have 
Bold previously without buying. This operation, conducl 
on a general scale, appears to imply a contradiction. But the 
precious metals at the sources of their production are directly 
1 changed for other commodities. And here we have Bal e 
(by the owner's of commodities without purchases (by the 
owners of gold or silver:/ 1 And subsequent Bale* by othei 

1 " Til l>y thin practice they keep all . *1< ;e.t-l uianufact M >M at fUoli Ion 

.." (Vanderlint, l. 0., p. '••<;.) 
Money ... ian pledge." (John Bellei B •• Po«r, Mftnifftetni 

Trftde, Plftntfttions, and [tnmorftl 1 ond., 1699, p. LS.) 

I purchaae, in a rioftl aae, implloa thftt gold and ailver are ftlreedj 

1 foi in of i oromod the pen! , k lc. 



io8 Capitalist Production. 

producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely bring about the 
distribution of the newly produced precious metals among all 
the owners of commodities. In this way, all along the line of 
exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent are ac- 
cumulated. With the possibility of holding and storing up 
exchange value in the shape of a particular commodity, arises 
also the greed for gold. Along with the extension of circula- 
tion, increases the power of money, that absolutely social form 
of wealth ever ready for use. " Gold is a wonderful thing ! 
Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means of 
gold one can even get souls into Paradise." (Columbus in his 
letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what 
has been transformed into it, ever3 T thing, commodity or not, 
is convertible into gold. Everything becomes saleable and 
buyable. The circulation becomes the great social retort into 
which everything is thrown, to come out again as a gold- 
crystal. Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are 
more delicate res sacrosanctse extra commercium hominum 
able to withstand this alchemy. 1 Just as every qualitative 
difference between commodities is extinguished in money, so 
money, on its side, like the radical leveller that it is, does 
away with all distinctions. 2 But money itself is a commodity, 

1 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their relics, and 
turned them into money. It is well known what part the despoiling of the Delphic 
Temple, by the Phocians, played in the history of Greece. Temples with the ancients 
served as the dwellings of the gods of commodities.. They were "sacred banks. " With 
the Phoenicians, a trading people par excellence, money was the transmuted shape of 
everything. It was, therefore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of 
the Goddess of Love, gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the 
piece of money they received. 

3 "Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold ! 

Thus much of this, will make black white ; foul, fair ; 

Wrong right ; base, noble ; old, young ; coward, valiant. 

. . . "What this, you gods ? Why, this 

Will lug your priests and servants from your sides ; 

Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads ; 

This yellow slave 

Will knit and break religions ; bless the accurs'd ; 

Make the hoar leprosy ador'd ; place thieves, 

And give them title, knee and approbation, 

With senators on the bench ; this is it, 

That makes the wappen'd widow wed again : 

Gome damned earth, 

Thou common whore of mankind." 

(Shakespeare : Timon of Others. ) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 109 

an external object, capable of becoming the private property 
of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private 
power of private persons. The ancients therefore denounced 
money as subversive of the economical and moral order of 
things. 1 Modern society, which, soon after its birth, pulled 
I'lutus by the hair of his head from the bowels of the earth, 2 
greets gold as its Holy Grail, as the glittering incarnation of 
the very principle of its own life. 

A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a 
particular want, and is a particular element of material wealth. 
But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its 
attraction for all other elements of material wealth, and there- 
fore measures the social wealth of its owner. To a barbarian 
owner of commodities, and even to a West-European peasant, 
value is the .same as value-form, and therefore, to him the 
increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in value. 
It is true that the value of money varies, at one time in con- 
sequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in 
consequence of a change in the values of commodities. But 
this, on the one hand, does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from 
still containing more value than 100 ounces, nor, on the other 
hand, does it hinder the actual metallic form of this article 
from continuing to be the universal equivalent form of all other 
commodities, and the immediate social incarnation of all 
human labour. The desire after hoarding is in its very nature 
unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, 
money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is the universal re- 
presentative of material wealth, because it is directly convertible 
into any other commodity. But, at the same time, every actual 
Mini of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a means 

1 " OuJm yap aufpouroiri* o7o» apyvpog 

Kaxov vcfiifffjca ifiXuffri' rovro xeci to) Mf 
llopfti, too' aitdpa; i^aoicrrtrt* 6ofJ.au. 
Tod i*3i5«r*i< xal Tttpakkdran fpi»a.( 
Xpno-raf Tpcf ono~%f,a. aufpuToif i£ii/, 
Ka! <ra»T0f Ipyov duffvipma* n'diva*.'* 

(Sophocles, Antigone). 
(Atlini. Deipnos.) 



iio Capitalist Production. 

of purchasing, has only a limited efticac)\ This antagonism 
"between the quantitative limits of mone}* and its qualitative 
boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his 
Sisyphus-like labour of accumulating. It is with him as it is 
with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed, only 
a new boundary. 

In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form 
a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from trans- 
forming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, 
therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold 
fetish. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On 
the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than 
what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities. The 
more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard work, 
saving, and avarice, are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, 
and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political 
economy. 1 

By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its 
aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles. This 
grows with the wealth of civil society. * Soyons riches ou 
paraissons riches " (Diderot). In this way there is created, on the 
one hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver, 
unconnected with their functions as money, and, on the other 
hand, a latent source of supply, to which recourse is had 
principally in times of crisis and social disturbance. 

Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the 
metallic circulation. Its first function arises out of the conditions 
to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We 
have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the 
extent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in 
their prices, the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs 
and flows. This mass must, therefore, be capable of expansion 
and contraction. At one time money must be attracted in 
order to act as circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must 
be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. 

1 " Accrescere quanto piu si pu6 il numero de' venditor! d'ogni merce, diminuere 
quanto piii si pu6 il numero dei eompratori, questi sono i caulini sui quali si raggirano 
tutte le operazioni di ecouoniia politica. " (Verri, I.e. p.52.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 1 1 1 

In order that the mass of money, actually current, may con- 
stantly saturate the absorbing power of the circulation, it is 
necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country bo 
greater than the quantity required to function as coin. This 
condition is fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards. 
These reserves serve as conduits for the supply or withdrawal 
of money to or from the circulation, which in this way never 
overflows its banks. 2 

b. Means of Payment. 

In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto 
considered, we found a given value always presented to us in 
a double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the 
opposite pole. The owners of commodities came therefore into 
contact as the respective representatives of what were already 
equivalents. But with the development of circulation, condi- 
tions arise under which the alienation of commodities becomes 
Beparated, by an interval of time, from the realisation of their 
prices. It will be sufficient to indicate the most simple of 
these conditions. One sort of article requires a longer, another 
a shorter time for its production. Again, the production of 
different commodities depends on different seasons of the year 
I hie sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, 
another has to make a long journey to market. Commodity- 
owner No. 1, may therefore be ready to sell, before No. *2 is 
ly to buy. When the same transactions are continually 

1 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determinate sum of 
ipeoifick money, which varies, and is sometimes more, sometimes less, as the cinum 
tt a n oee we ere in require. . . . This ebbing end flowing of money supplies end 

eeeommodetei itself, without any aid of Politicians. . . . The huckets work 

elternetely; when money] bullion leooinedj when bullion ia eoaroe, money 

is melted." (Sir I >. North, 1. c., Postscript, p. 3.) John Stuart Mill, who for a Ion;; time 
was an ollicial of the Beet India ( 'nmpany, contii mi t be f;u t that in India silver ome 
mints still continue to perform dmctly the functions of a hoard. The siher 

ornam en ti are brought out and eoined when there is a high rate of Intereeti and go 
liark again when the rate of Intereet fallH. (J. S. Mill's Bridenoe, "Beporti on 
Bank Acts," hs.'.r, 2064.) Aeoording to a Parliamentary doonmenl of L864| on the gold 

and sil\i i Import and export of India, the import of gold and silvn iu 1868 I KOQOdod 

tie export i»y £19,867,761 Daring the B yean Immediately preeedinn 1864, the 
■ of Importi orei exporti of the precious metali amounted to £109,66S,917< 

Inuring this ccntuiy fur motl than £"J00,000,000 haa btflB coined in Ind 



1 1 2 Capitalist Production. 

repeated between the same persons, the conditions of sale are 
regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. On 
the other hand, the use of a given commodity, ot a house, for 
instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. 
Here, it is only at the end of the term that the buyer has 
actuall}' received the use-value of the commodity. He there- 
fore buys it before he pays for it. The vendor sells an exist- 
ing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere representative 
of money, or rather of future money. The vendor becomes a 
creditor, the purchaser becomes a debtor. Since the metamor- 
phosis of commodities, or the development of their value-form, 
appears here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh 
function ; it becomes the means of payment. 

The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the 
simple circulation. The change in the form of that circulation 
stamps buyer and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, 
these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of 
seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. 
But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more 
capable of crystallization. 1 The same characters can, however, 
be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. 
The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form chief! v 
of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome 
ended in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were dis- 
placed by slaves. In the middle-ages the contest ended with 
the ruin of the feudal debtors, who lost their political power 
together with the economical basis on which it was established. 
Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor and creditor that 
existed at these two periods reflected only the deeper-lying 
antagonism between the general economical conditions of 
existence of the classes in question. 

Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The 
appearance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at 
the two poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simulta- 

1 The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing between English 
traders at the beginning of the 18th century. " Such a spirit of cruelty reigns here 
in England among the men of trade, that is not to be met with in any other society 
of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world." ("An Essay on Credit and the 
Bankrupt Act," Lond., 1707, p. "2. ) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 1 1 3 

neous. The money functions now, first as a measure of value 
in the determination of the price of the commodity sold ; the 
price fixed by the contract measures the obligation of the 
debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed 
date. Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. 
Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to pay, it 
causes the commodity to change hands. It is not before the 
day fixed for payment that the means of payment actually 
steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of 
the seller. The circulating medium was transformed into a 
hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase, 
because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, 
was withdrawn from circulation. r l he means of payment 
enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left 
it. The money is no longer the means that brings about the 
process. It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the 
absolute form of existence of exchange value, or as the 
universal commodity. The seller turned his commodity into 
money, in order thereby to satisfy some want ; the hoarder did 
the same in order to keep his commodity in its money-shape, 
and the debtor in order to be able to pay ; if he do not paj , 
bit) goods will be sold by the sheriff. The value-form of com- 
modities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, 
and that owing to a social necessity springing out of the 
process of circulation itself. 

The buyer converts money back into commodities before he 
has turned commodities into money : in other words, he achieves 
tin; second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The 
seller's commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in 
tin; shape of a legal claim upon money. It is converted into a 
'i e value before it has been converted into money. The 
completion of its first metamorphosis follows only at a later 
period. 1 

1 [t will be teen from the following quotation from my book whiofa appe a red in 

lK, r >!>, why I take no not ice in T 1 1 • ■ toxl (if ;in oppotitfl form : "< 'out lai iu im-, in the pro 
r.vnn M ( ', ( he rm>n-v OM DC alienated M a real means of purchase, and in that ua\ . 
the price of the ( < > 1 1 ■ modity can he realised before the use value <>f the mom 

'1 and the commodity actually delivered. This 0001111 constantly under the 
svery day form of pre payments. And it is under tins form, that the Knglisb 

U 



1 1 4 Capitalist Production. 

The obligations falling due within a given period, represent 
the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which 
gave rise to those obligations. The quantity of gold necessary 
to realise this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the 
rapidity of currency of the means of payment. That quantity 
is conditioned by two circumstances : first the relations be- 
tween debtors and creditors form a sort of chain, in such a way 
that A, when he receives money from his debtor B, straight- 
way hands it over to C his creditor, and so on ; the second 
circumstance is the length of the intervals between the 
different due- days of the obligations. The continuous chain 
of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially 
different from that interlacing of the series of metamorphoses 
which we considered on a former page. By the currency of 
the circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and 
sellers, is not merely expressed. This connexion is originated 
by, and exists in, the circulation alone. Contrariwise, the 
movement of the means of payment expresses a social relation 
that was in existence long before. 

The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, 
and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be re- 
placed by the rapidity of currency. On the other hand, this 
fact is a new lever in economising the means of payment. In 
proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special 
institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation. 
Such in the middle ages were the virements at Lyons. The 
debts due to A from B, to B from C, to C from A, and so on, 
have onlv to be confronted with each other, in order to annul 
each other to a certain extent like positive and negative 
quantities. There thus remains only a single balance 
to pay. The greater the amount of the payments concen- 
trated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, 
and the less is the mass of the means of payment in 
circulation. 

The function of money as the means of payment implies a 

government purchases opium from the ryots of India. ... In these cases, however, the 
money always acts as a means of purchase. . . . Of course capital also is ad- 
vanced in the shape of money. . . . This point of view, however, docs not fall 
within the horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik." &o., pp. Ill), 120.) 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 1 1 5 

contradiction without a terminus metlius. In so far as the 
payments balance one another, money functions only ideally 
as money of account, as a measure of value. In so far as actual 
payments have to be made, money does not serve as a circu- 
lating medium, as a mere transient a^ent in the interchange 
of products, but as the individual incarnation of social labour, 
as the independent form of existence of exchange value, as the 
universal commodity. This contradiction comes to a head in 
those phases of industrial and commercial crises which are 
known as monetary crises. 1 Such a crisis occurs only where 
the ever-lengthening chain of payments, and an artificial system 
of settling them, has been fully developed. Whenever there 
is a general and extensive disturbance of this mechanism, no 
matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and immedi- 
ately transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of 
account, into hard cash. Profane commodities can no longer 
replace it. The use-value of commodities becomes valueless, 
and their value vanishes in the presence of its own independent 
form. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with the self- 
sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, declares 
money to be a vain imagination. Commodities alone are 
money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a 
commodity ! As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his 
soul after money, the only wealth. 2 In a crisis, the antithesis 
between commodities and their value-form, money, becomes 
heightened into an absolute contradiction. Hence, in such 
events, the form under which money appears is of no import- 

] The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every crisis, must be 
ly distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which also is called a mom 
, but which may be produoed hy itself as an Independent phenomenon in 

I Mb ■ way as I nly indirectly OB industry ami c<>mimi cc. The pivot of these 

> be found in moneyed capital, and their iphereof direct action is then 
fore the sphere of that capital, vis., banking, the stock exchange, and finance. 

- "The tudden reversion from ■ lystera of oredii tos system of hard cash h< 
theoretical fright onto], of the practical panic; and the dealer! by who* 
< Iroulation ii sffe< ted, ihudder before the Impenetrable mystery In which their own 
economical relations are involved" (Kail tfarx, Lo.p. L26), "The poor stand still, be 
the rich have no raoni y to employ them, though they have the same land and 
hands to provide victuals and olothei they had ; . . . which is the true EU< 

m, ami not the money." ( John Boilers j "Proposali foi raising a Oolh 
oi In 1. -mi. L69 -. p. 8.) 



1 1 6 Capitalist Production. 

ance. The money famine continues, whether payments have 
to be made in gold or in credit money such as bank-notes. 1 

If we now consider the sum total of the money current dur- 
ing a given period, we shall find that, given the rapidity <>t 
currency of the circulating medium and of the means of pay- 
ment, it is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised, plus 
the sum of the payments falling due, minus the payments that 
balance each other, minus finally the number of circuits in 
which the same piece of coin serves in turn as means of 
circulation and of payment. Hence, even when prices, rapidity 
of currency, and the extent of the economy in payments, are 
given, the quantity of money current and the mass of com- 
modities circulating during a given period, such as a day, no 
longer correspond. Money that represents commodities long 
withdrawn from circulation, continues to be current. Com- 
modities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not appear 
on the scene till some future day. Moreover, the debts con- 
tracted each clay, and the payments falling due on the same 
day,, are quite incommensurable quantities. 2 

Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money 
as a means of payment. Certificates of the debts owing for the 

i The following shows how such times are exploited by the " amis du commerce." 
11 On one occasion (1839) an old grasping banker (in the city) in his private room raised 
the lid of the desk he sat over, and displayed to a friend rolls of banknotes, Baying 
with intense glee there were £000,000 of them, they were held to make money tight, 
and would all be let our after three o'clock on the same day." (" The Theory of 
Exchanges. The Bank Charter Act of 1844. " Lond. 18G4. p. 81.) The Obser 
semi-official government organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 18(14: 
" Some very curious rumours are current of the means which have been resorted U 

in order to create a scarcity of Banknotes Questionable as it would seem, ti 

suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has been so uni\ 
that it really deserves mention." 

i "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course of any givei 
day, will not affect the quantity of money afloat on that particular day, but, in th< 
vast majority of cases, will resolve themselves into multifarious drafts upon th 
quantity of money which may be afloat at subsequent dates more or less distant 
. . . . The bills granted or credits opened, to-day, need have no resemblance 
whatever, either in quantity, amount, or duration, to those granted or entered upoi 
to-morrow or next day ; nay, many of to-day's bills, and credits, when due, fall ii 
with a mass of liabilities whose origins traverse a range of antecedent dates altogetlu- 
indefinite, bills at 12, (5, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to swell the commoj 
liabilities of one particular day. ..." (" The Currency Theory Reviewed ; 
letter to the Scottish people." By a Banker in England. Edinburgh, 184"), pp. 29, I 
passim.) 



Money, or tlie Circulation of Commodities. 1 1 7 

r>urchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring 
those debts to others. On the other hand, to the same extent 
is the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money 
IS a means of payment. Ln that character it takes various 
forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in 
the sphere of great commercial transactions. Gold and silver 
;oin, on the other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of 
retail trade. 1 

When the production of commodities has sufficiently ex- 
tended itself, money begins to serve as the means of payment 
beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. It 
becomes the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of 
all contracts. 2 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are 
transformed from payments in kind into money payments. To 
what extent this transformation depends upon the general 
conditions of production, is shown, to take one example, by the 
fact that the Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy 
all contributions in money. The unspeakable misery of the 
French agricultural population under Louis XIV., a misery so 
eloquently denounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal, Vauban, and 
others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also 



ki an example of how little ready money is required in true commercial opera- 
tions, I give below a statement by one of the largest London houses of its yearly 
receipts and payments. Its transaction! during the year L866, extending to many 
millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the scale of one million. 



Bkbri. 
Bankers 1 and Merchants' Bills 

payable after <lnte, 

s on 1 linkers, kc, 

payable on demand, - 
< 'omiti y Notes, 
Bank of England XoteB, 

Gold, 

Silver and < '"pi" 1 . 
Pott Office Orders, 



Total, 



£588,006 

:tf7.7ir, 

- 

68 

28,089 
1,486 



Paymknts. 
Bills payable after date, 
Cheques on London Bankers,' 
Hunk of England Notes, 

Gold, 

Silver and < topper, 



£302,674 
8,427 

MM 



Total, 



JL1.IMKI.(MJ 



" 1:. porl from th< Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1868," p. IxxL 
" The oonrsc of trade being thai turned, from »™h^«gjng ,,f goods for goods, 01 
delivering and Uing and paying, all thi bargains . . . are now s1 

upon the fool <.t .1 Price In money. 1 ("Ai ipou PubUel Oredii ' Brd Bd. 

Lend., 1710, p. 8.) 



1 1 8 Capitalist Production. 

to the conversion of taxes in kind into money taxes. 1 In Asia, 
on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed 
of rents payable in kind, depends on conditions of production 
that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena. 
And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the 
ancient form of production. It is one of the secrets of the con- 
servation of the Ottoman Empire. If the foreign trade, forced 
upon Japan by Europeans, should lead to the substitution of 
money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the 
exemplary agriculture of that country. The narrow economical 
conditions under which that agriculture is carried on, will be 
swept away. 

In every country, certain days of the } T ear become by habit 
recognised settling days for various large and recurrent pay- 
ments. These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the 
wheel of reproduction, on conditions closely connected with 
the seasons. They also regulate the dates for payments that 
have no direct connexion with the circulation of commodities 
such as taxes, rents, and so on. The quantity of money re- 
quisite to make the payments, falling due on those dates all 
over the country, causes periodical, though merely superficial, 
perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment. 2 

From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of 

1 " L'argcnt ... est devenu le bourreau de toutes choses." Finance is the " alambic, 
qui a fait cvaporer line quantite effroyable de biens et de denrees pour faire ce fatal 
precis." " L'argent declare la guerre a tout le genre humain." (Boisguillebert : 
" Dissertation sur la nature des ricliesses, de l'argent et des tributs." Edit. Daiie. 
Economistes financiers. Taris, 1843, t. i., pp. 413, 419, 417.) 

2 " On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr Craig before the Commons' Committee of 182l>, 
" there was such an immense demand for notes upon the banks of Edinburgh, that 
by 11 o'clock they had not a note left in their custody. They sent round to all the 
different banks to borrow, but could not get them, and many of the transactions 
were adjusted by slips of paper only ; yet by three o'clock the whole of the notes 
were returned into the banks from which they had issued ! It was a mere transfer 
from hand to hand." Although the average effective circulation of bank-notes in 
Scotland is less than three millions sterling, yet on certain pay days in the year, 
every single note in the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to about 
£7,000,000, is called into activity. On these occasions the notes have a single and 
specific function to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they flow back 
into the various banks from which they issued. (See John Fullarton, " Regulation of 
Currencies." Lond : 1844, p. 85 note). In explanation it should be stated, 
that in Scotland, at the date of Fullartou's work, notes and not cheques were used tf 
withdraw deposits. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 1 1 9 

payment, it follows that the quantity of the means of pay- 
ment required for all periodical payments, whatever their 
source, is in inverse proportion to the length of their periods. 
The development of money into a medium of payment 
makes it necessary to accumulate money against the dates 
fixed for the payment of the sums owing. While hoarding, as 
a distinct mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress 
of civil society, the formation of reserves of the means of pay- 
ment grows with that progress. 

c. Universal Money. 

When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it 
strips off the local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard 
of prices, of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and re- 
turns to its original form of bullion. In the trade between the 
markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so 
as to be universally recognised. Hence their independent 
value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under the 
shape of universal money. It is only in the markets of tho 
world that money acquires to the full extent the character of the 
commodity whose bodily form is also the immediate social in- 
carnation of human labour in the abstract. Its real mode of 
existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal 
concept. 

Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one 
commodity which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes 
money. In the markets of the world a double measure of 
value holds sway, gold and silver. 3 

1 To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p.a., whether the 
MOM 6 millions (gold) . . . would suffice for such revolutions and circulations thereof, 
as trade requires," Petty replied in hie usual masterly manner, "Ianswerycs: for the 

> \|" i !0 millions, it the revolutions wt;ri: in such short circles, viz., wn kly, 

tppeni among poor artisan! and labo ur er!, who receive and pe>y every Saturday, 
then .'. parte of l million of money would answer theee endi; hut if the oirolei 
quarterly, according to oat oustom of paying rent, and gatherin then 10 

milliom w> re requisite. Wherefore, supposing payment! in genera] to be of ;i o 
oirole between one weeh and L8, then add L0 millions to ||, the half of which will 
, so us if we have r».i, millions we have enough." (William Petty : " Political 
Anatomy of Ireland." L672. Edit: Loud. 1601, pp. IS. 14.) 

' Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of i ball 

form i of that pinions metal alone which oircnlates at home Th< 



i 20 Capitalist Production. 

Money of the world serves as the universal medium of 
payment, as the universal means of purchasing, and as the 
universally recognised embodiment of all wealth. Its function 
as a means of payment in the settling of international balances 
is its chief one. Hence the watchword of the mercantilists, 
balance of trade. 1 Gold and silver serve as international means 
of purchasing chiefly and necessarily in those periods when 
the customary equilibrium in the interchange of products 
between different nations is suddenly disturbed. And lastly, 
it serves as the universally recognised embodiment of social 
wealth, whenever the question is not of buying or paying, but 
of transferring wealth from one country to another, and when- 
ever this transference in the form of commodities is rendered 
impossible, either by special conjunctures in the markets, or 
by the purpose itself that is intended. 2 

Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home 
circulation, so, too, it requires one for external circulation in 

difficulties " thus self-created by the Bank of England, are well known. On the 
subject of the great epochs in the history of the changes in the relative value of gold and 
silver, see Karl Marx, 1. c. p. 136 sq. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844, sought 
to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of England to issue notes against 
silver bullion, on condition that the reserve of silver should never exceed more than 
one-fourth of the reserve of gold. The value of silver being for that purpose estimated 
at its price in the London market. 

1 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system, a system which considered 
the settlement of surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the aim of international 
trade, entirely misconceived the functions of money of the world. I have shown by 
the example of Kicardo in what way their false conception of the laws that regulate 
the quantity of the circulating medium, is reflected in their equally false conception 
of the international movement of the precious metals (1. c. pp. 150 sq.) His 
erroneous dogma : " An unfavourable balance of trade never arises but from a re- 
dundant currency. . . . The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and 
is not the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance," already occurs in Barbon : 
" The Balance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the money 
out of a nation ; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion in 
every country." (N. Barbon ; 1. c. pp. 50, GO.) MacCulloch in "the Literature of 
Political Economy, a classified catalogue, Lond. 1845," praises Barbon for this anti- 
cipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which Barbon clothes the 
absurd supposition on which the "currency principle " is based. The absence of real 
criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue, culminates in the sections devoted 
to the history of the theory of money ; the reason is that MacCulloch in this part of 
the work is flattering Lord Overstone whom he calls "facile princeps argentariorum. v 

1 For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for enabling banks 
to resume cash payments, &c, it is the money form, and no other, of value that may 
be wanted. 



Money, or the Circulation of Commodities. 1 2 1 

the markets of the world. The functions of hoards, therefore, 
arise in part out of the function of money, as the medium of 
the home circulation and home payments, and in part out 
of its function of money of the world. 1 For this latter func- 
tion, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold and silver, is 
necessary. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to 
distinguish them from their purely local substitutes, calls gold 
and silver "money of the world." 

The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. 
On the one hand, it spreads itself from its sources over all the 
markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various 
extents, into the different national spheres of circulation, to 
fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and silver 
coins, to supply the material of articles of luxury, and to 
petrify into hoards. 2 This first current is started by the 
countries that exchange their labour, realised in commodities, 
for the labour embodied in the precious metals by gold and 
silver-producing countries. On the other hand, there is a con- 
tinual flowing backwards and forwards of gold and silver be- 
tween the different national spheres of circulation, a current 
whose motion depends on the ceaseless fluctuations in the 
course of exchange. 3 

Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is de- 
veloped to a certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in 
the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for 

1 " I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the competency of the 
machinery of the hoardt in ipecie-pajing countries to perform every necessary office 
Ol international adjustment, without any sensible aid from the general circulation, 
tli. .n thfl facility with which France, when hut just recovering from the shuck of ■ 

destructive foreign invarion, completed within the space of 27 months the payment 
" f ,1,r toned contribution of nearly 20 millioni t«» the allied powera, and • ooneider 
able proportion of the sum In specie, without any perceptible contraction or derai 
ment of her domeetio currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exohao 
(Fullarton, 1. e., p. 184.) 

" L'argent ae partage entre lee nations relatiremenl an beeoin qn'ellee en ont . . . 
toujour* attire par lee productione." (Le TrocneL 0., p. 916.) "Theminei 
which ere continually giving gold and silver, do gire rufficient bo supply inch a need 
ful balance to every nation." 1.1. Vanderlint, 1. c, p. ui | 

" Bxchangei riee and fall every week, and at tome particular timet in the 
ran high against ,1 nation, and .a other timet run as Ugh on the oontrary.' (H, 
Barbon, 1. e.,p, 89.) 



122 Capitalist Production. 

the proper performance of their peculiar functions. 1 When- 
ever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it 
is, with some exceptions, an indication of stagnation in the 
circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the even flow 
of their metamorphoses. 2 

1 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conflict with one an- 
other whenever gold and silver have also to serve as a fund for the conversion of bank- 
notes. 

2 " "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Trade, is dead 
stock . . . and brings no profit to that country it's kept in, but as it is transported in 
trade, as well as imported." (John Bellers, Essays, p. 12.) " What if we have too 
much coin ? We may melt down the heaviest and turn it into the splendour of plate, 
vessels or utensils of gold or silver ; or send it out as a commodity, where the same 
is wanted or desired ; or let it out at interest, where interest is high. " (W. Petty : 
" Quantulumcunque," p. 39.) " Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof 
too much doth as often hinder its agility, as too little makes it sick .... as fat 
lubricates the motion of the muscles, feeds in want of victuals, fills up the uneven 
cavities, and beautifies the body ; so doth money in the state quicken its action, feeds 
from abroad in time of dearth at home ; evens accounts . . and beautifies the whole ; 
altho more especially the particular persons that have it in plenty." (W. Petty, 
" Political Anatomy of Ireland," p. 14.) 



PART II. 

THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO 

CAPITAL. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL. 

The circulation of commodities is the starting point of capital. 
The production of commodities, their circulation, and that more 
developed form of their circulation called commerce, these form 
the historical groundwork from which it rises. The modern 
history of capital dates from the creation in the IGth century 
of a world-embracing commerce and a world-embracing market. 

If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation 
of commodities, that is, from the exchange of the various use- 
values, and consider only the economic forms produced by this 
process of circulation, we find its final result to be money : this 
final product of the circulation of commodities is the first form 
in which capital appears. 

As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property, 
invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as 
moneyed wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of tin- 
Usurer. 1 But we have no need to refer to the origin of capital 
in order to discover that the first form of appearance of capital 
is money. We can see it daily under our very eyes. All new 
capital, to commence with, comes on the stage, that is, on the 
market, whether of commodities, labour-, or money, even in our 

1 'I'll.- < i. no. i a th( I'" ad on the prion*! relatione of dominion and 

bode, tint ii oonferred by landed property, and tin' Impersonal power that i-. 
liven by money, ll w.n .■ by tin- tun Frenan proverbs, u Nulleterr< 

• m," and " L 'argent n 



124 Capitalist Produdio7i. 

Jays, in the shape of money that by a definite process has to 
be transformed into capital. 

The first distinction we notice between money that is money 
only, and money that is capital, is nothing more than a differ- 
ence in their form of circulation. 

The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C — 
M — C, the transformation of commodities into money, and the 
change of the money back again into commodities ; or selling in 
order to buy. But alongside of this form we find another 
specifically different form: M — C — M, the transformation of 
money into commodities, and the change of commodities back 
again into money ; or buying in order to sell. Money that 
circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, be- 
comes capital, and is already potentially capital. 

Now let us examine the circuit M — C — M a little closer. It 
consists, like the other, of two antithetical phases. In the first 
phase, M — C, or the purchase, the money is changed into a com- 
modity. In the second phase, C — M, or the sale, the commodity 
is changed back again into money. The combination of these 
two phases constitutes the single movement whereby money is 
exchanged for a commodity, and the same commodity is again 
exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order 
to be sold, or, neglecting the distinction in form between buying 
and selling, whereby a commodity is bought with money, and 
then money is bought with a commodity. 1 The result, in which 
the phases of the process vanish, is the exchange of money for 
money, M — M. If I purchase 2000 lbs. of cotton for £100, and 
resell the 2000 lbs. of cotton for £110, 1 have, in fact, exchanged 
£100 for £110, money for money. 

Now it is evident that the circuit M — C — M would be 
absurd and without meaning if the intention were to exchange 
by this means two equal sums of money, £100 for £100. The 
miser's plan would be far simpler and surer ; he sticks to his 
£100 instead of exposing it to the dangers of circulation. And 
yet, whether the merchant who has paid £100 for his cotton 

1 " Avec de l'argent on achete des marchandises, et avec dos marchandises on 
achete de l'argent." (Mercier de la Riviere : " L'ordre naturel et essentiel des societes 
IKditiqucfl," p. 543.) 



TJie General Formula for Capital. 125 

sells it for £110, or lets it go for £100, or even £50, his money 
has, at all events, gone through a characteristic and original 
movement, quite different in kind from that which it goes 
through in the hands of the peasant who sells corn, and with 
the money thus set free buys clothes. We have therefore to 
examine first the distinguishing characteristics of the forms of 
the circuits M — C — M and C — M — C, and in doing this the 
real difference that underlies the mere difference of form will 
reveal itself. 

Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in 
common. 

Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical 
phases, C — M, a sale, and M — C, a purchase. In each of these 
phases the same material elements — a commodity, and money, 
and the same economical dramatis personge, a buyer and a 
seller — confront one another. Each circuit is the unity of the 
same two antithetical phases, and in each case this unity is 
brought about by the intervention of three contracting parties, 
of whom one only sells, another only buys, while the third both 
buys and sells. 

What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit 
C — M — C from the circuit M — C — M, is the inverted order of 
succession of the two phases. The simple circulation of com- 
modities begins with a sale and ends with a purchase, while 
the circulation of money as capital begins with a purchase 
and ends with a sale. In the one case botli the starting- 
point and the goal are commodities, in the other they are 
money. In the first form the movement is brought about 
by the intervention of money, in the second by that of a 
commodity. 

In the circulation C — M — C, the money is in the end con- 
verted into a commodity, that Berves as a use-value ; it is spent 
once for all. In tln> inverted form, M — C — M, on the contrary, 
the buyer lays out money in order that, as a Beller, he 
may recover money. By the purchase of his commodity 
he throws money into circulation, in order to withdraw 
again by the sale of the same commodity, lb' lets the 
money go, but only with the sly intention of getting it 



126 Capitalist Production. 

back again. The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely 
advanced. 1 

In the circuit C — M — C, the same piece of money changes 
its place twice. The seller gets it from the buyer and pays it 
away to another seller. The complete circulation, which begins 
with the receipt, concludes with the payment, of money for 
commodities. It is the very contrary in the circuit M — C — M. 
Here it is not the piece of money that changes its place twice, 
but the commodity. The buyer takes it from the hands of 
the seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer. Just 
as in the simple circulation of commodities the double change 
of place of the same piece of money effects its passage from one 
hand into another, so here the double change of place of the 
same commodity brings about the reflux of the money to its 
point of departure. 

Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold 
for more than was paid for it. This circumstance influences 
only the amount of the money that comes back. The reflux 
itself takes place, so soon as the purchased commodity is re- 
sold, in other words, so soon as the circuit M — C — M is com- 
pleted. We have here, therefore, a palpable difference between 
the circulation of money as capital, and its circulation as mere 
money. 

The circuit C — M — C comes completely to an end, so soon 
as the money bi ought in by the sale of one commodity is 
abstracted again by the purchase of another. 

If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its start- 
ing point, this can only happen through a renewal or repeti- 
tion of the operation. If I sell a quarter of corn for £3, and 
with this £3 buy clothes, the money, so far as I am concerned, 
is spent and done with. It belongs to the clothes merchant. 
If I now sell a second quarter of corn, money indeed flows 
back to me, not however as a sequel to the first transaction, 
but in consequence of its repetition. The money again leaves 
me, so soon as 1 complete this second transaction by a fresh 

i "When a thing is bought in order to be sold again, the sum employed is called 
money advanced ; when it is bought not to be sold, it may be said to be expended." — 
(.lame* steuart : " Works," &c.. Edited by Gen. Sir James Steuart, his son. Lond., 
L805. V. I., p. 274.) 



The General Formula J or Capital. 12/ 

purchase. Therefore, in the circuit C — M — C, the expenditure 
of money has nothing to do with its reflux. On the other 
hand, in M — C — M, the reflux of the money is conditioned by 
the very mode of its expenditure. Without this reflux, the 
operation fails, or the process is interrupted and incomplete, 
owing to the absence of its complementary and final phase, the 
sale. 

The circuit C — M — C starts with one commodity, and 
finishes with another, which falls out of circulation and into 
consumption. Consumption, the satisfaction of wants, in one 
word, use- value, is its end and aim. The circuit M — C — M, 
on the contrary, commences with money and ends with money. 
Its leading motive, and the goal that attracts it, is therefore 
mere exchange value. 

In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of 
the circuit have the same economic form. They are both com- 
modities, and commodities of equal value. But they are also 
use-values differing in their qualities, as, for example, corn and 
clothes. The exchange of products, of the different materials in 
which the labour of society is embodied, forms here the basis 
of the movement. It is otherwise in the circulation M — C — M, 
which at first sight appears purposeless, because tautological. 
Both extremes have the same economic form. They are both 
money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use-values ; 
for money is but the converted form of commodities, in which 
their particular use-values vanish. To exchange £100 for 
cotton, and then this same cotton again for £100, is merely a 
roundabout way of exchanging money for money, the same for 
the same, and appears to be an operation just as purposeless as 
absurd. 1 ( me sum of money is distinguishable from another 

1 "On a*echangc pas dc I'argent oontre de I'argent, " sayi Ifercier do la Riviere to 
the Mercantilists (L c , p. 486.) In a work, which, ex profeaao, treats of " trade " and 
"speculation," occurs the following: u All trade oonsists In the exchange of things 
of different kinds ; and the advantage " (t<> the merohantf) "arises oul of tlu^ 
difference. T-> exchange a pound >>\ '■ dnai ;i pound of bread . . . . 

would be attended with no advantage; .... Bonos trade is advantageously 
eontrasted with gambling, which oonsists In I mi of money for money. 

' I'll. Corbet, " An Enquiry Into the I u d Modi i <>t* the Wealth "t" Endh I ; 

or the Principles of Trade and Speculation explained. M London, L841, p. 0.) Althi 
Corbi ti .it m af, the exchange of money for money, Is the oharacti 



128 Capitalist Production. 

only by its amount. The character and tendency of the pro- 
cess M — C — M, is therefore not due to any qualitative difference 
between its extremes, both being money, but solely to their 
quantitative difference. More money is withdrawn from circula- 
tion at the finish than was thrown into it at the start. The 
cotton that was bought for £100 is perhaps resold for £100 -f 
£10 or £110. The exact form of this process is therefore M — 
C — M', where M' = M. + A M =. the original sum advanced, 
plus an increment. This increment or excess over the original 
value I call " surplus-value." The value originally advanced, 
therefore, not only remains intact while in circulation, but adds 
to itself a surplus-value or expands itself. It is this movement 
that converts it into capital. 

Of course, it is also possible, that in C — M — C, the two 
extremes C — C, say corn and clothes, may represent different 
quantities of value. The farmer may sell his corn above its 
value, or may buy the clothes at less than their value, lie 
may, on the other hand, " be done " by the clothes merchant. 
Yet, in the form of circulation now under consideration, such 
differences in value are purely accidental. The fact that the 
corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive the pro- 
cess of all meaning, as it does in M — C — M. The equivalence 
of their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal 
course. 

The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to 
buy, is kept within bounds by the very object it aims at, 
namely, consumption or the satisfaction of definite wants, an 
aim that lies altogether outside the sphere of circulation. But 
when we buy in order to sell, we, on the contrary, begin and 

form of circulation, not only of merchants' capital but of all capital, yet at least he 
acknowledges that this form is common to gambling and to one species of trade, viz., 
speculation : but then comes MacCulloch and makes out, that to buy in order to sell, 
is to speculate, and thus the difference between Speculation and Trade vanishes. 
"Every transaction in which an individual buys produce in order to sell it again, is, 
in fact, a speculation." (MacCulloch : "A Dictionary Practical, &c, of Commerce." 
Lond., 1847, p. 1058.) With much more naivete, Pinto, the Pindar of the Amster- 
dam Stock Exchange, remarks, " Le commerce est un jeu : (taken from Locke) et ce 
n'est pas avec dcs gueux qu'on peut gagner. Si Ton gagnait long-temps en tout awe 
tous, il faudrait rendre de bon accord les plus grandes parties du profit pour recorn- 
mencer le jeu." (Pinto : " Traite de la Circulation et du Credit." Amsterdam, 1771, 
p. 231.) 



The General Formula for Capital. 129 

end with the same thing, money, exchange-value ; and thereby 
the movement becomes interminable. No doubt, M becomes 
M -f a M, £100 become £110. But when viewed in their 
qualitative aspect alone, £110 are the same as £100, namely 
money; and considered quantitatively, £110 is, like £100, a 
sum of definite and limited value. If now, the £110 be spent 
as money, they cease to play their part. They are no longer 
capital. Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified 
into a hoard, and though they remained in that state till 
doomsday, not a single farthing would accrue to them. If, 
then, the expansion of value is once aimed at, there is just the 
same inducement to augment the value of the £110 as that of 
the £100 ; for both are but limited expressions for exchange- 
value, and therefore both have the same vocation to approach, 
by quantitative increase, as near as possible to absolute wealth. 
Momentarily, indeed, the value originally advanced, the £100 
is distinguishable from the surplus value of £10 that is an- 
nexed to it during circulation; but the distinction vanishes 
immediately. At the end of the process, we do not receive 
with one hand the original £100, and with the other, the 
surplus-value of £10. We simply get a value of £110, which 
is in exactly the same condition and fitness for commencing 
the expanding piocess, as the original £100 was. Money ends 
the movement only to begin it again. 1 Therefore, the final 
result of every separate circuit, in which a purchase and con- 
sequent sale are completed, forms of itself the starting point 
of a new circuit. The simple circulation of commodities — 
selling in order to buy — is a means of carrying out a purpose 
unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropriation of 
use- values, the satisfaction of wants. The circulation of money 
as capital is, on the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion 
of value takes place only within this constantly renewed 
movement. The circulation of capital has therefore no Limits, 

1 "Capital is divisible .... into tho original capital and t In- profit, the inn. I 
to the capital .... although in practice this profit is immediately turned into 
capital, ami iet in motion with tin- original." (F. Bngele, "Umrisse ro einer KOtik 
Nationalolconomie, in: Deutseb Franzosisohc Jahrbuoher, 1. vim 

Arnold Etafc and Karl Marx." Parte, 1844, p. 99.) 

1 Aristotle o] .one to ( in « in.it itstic. Be itwti from the former. 

Ear as it U the art of gaining a livelihood, it is HmHt^ tj procuring thohc art 



130 Capitalist Production. 

As the conscious representative of this movement, the 
possessor of money becomes a capitalist. His person, or rather 
his pocket, is the point from which the money starts and to 
which it returns. The expansion of value, which is the 
objective basis or main-spring of the circulation M — C — M, 
becomes his subjective aim, and it is only in so far as the 
appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract 
becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as 
a capitalist, that is, as capital personified and endowed with 
consciousness and a will. Use-values must therefore never 
be looked upon as the real aim of the capitalist; 1 neither 
must the profit on any single transaction. The restless never- 
ending process of profit-making alone is what he aims at. 3 

that are necessary to existence, and useful either to a household or the state. " True 
wealth (o dkr^ivos tXouto;) consists of such values in use ; for the quantity of pos- 
sessions of this kind, capable of making life pleasant, is not unlimited. There is, 
however, a second mode of acquiring things, to which we may by preference and 
with correctness give the name of Chrematistic, and in this case there appear to be 
no limits to riches and possessions. Trade (^ xa^X/xrj is literally retail trade, and 
Aristotle takes this kind because in it values in use predominate) does not in it6 
nature belong to Chrematistic, for here the exchange has reference only to what is 
necessary to themselves (the buyer or seller)." Therefore, as he goes on to show, 
the original form of trade was barter, but with the extension of the latter, there 
arose the necessity for money. On the discovery of money, barter of necessity de- 
veloped into KocTtjXtKh, into trading in commodities, and this again, in opposition to 
its original tendency, grew into Chrematistic, into the art of making money. Now 
Chrematistic is distinguishable from (Economic in this way, that " in the case of 
Chrematistic, circulation is the source of ricbes (-roin-ixh xP ri l uc ^ Teuv . . . . Wi 
X_pniu.6.rctjv HiafiiXris). And it appears to revolve about money, for money is the be- 
ginning and end of this kind of exchange (to yap vo/mo-fia o-toi^uov xa.1 vipa; <rr); 
riWayrji I*r/v). Therefore also riches, such as Chrematistic strives for, are un- 
limited. Just as every art that is not a means to an end, but an end in itself, has 
no limit to its aims, because it seeks constantly to approach nearer and nearer to 
that end, while those arts that pursue means to an end, are not boundless, since 
the goal itself imposes a limit upon them, so with Chrematistic, there are no bounds 
to its aims, these aims being absolute wealth. (Economic not Chrematistic has a 
limit .... the object of the former is something different from money, of the 
latter the augmentation of money .... By confounding these two forms, which 
overlap each other, some people have been led to look upon the preservation and 
increase of money ad infinitum as the end and aim of (Economic." (Aristoteles De 
Rep. edit. Bekker. lib. I. c. 8, 9. passim.) 

1 "Commodities (here used in the sense of use-values) are not the terminating object 
of the trading capitalist, money is his terminating object." (Th. Chalmers, On Pol. 
Econ. &c, 2nd Ed., Glasgow, 1832, p. 165, 166.) 

11 II mercante non conta quasi per niente il lucro fatto, ma mira sempre al futuro.' 
(A Genovesi, Lezioni di Kconomia Civile (1765), Custodi's edit, of Italian ixononiists. 
Parte iloduiu. t. viii. p. loJ.) 



The General Formula for Capital. 1 3 1 

This boundless greed after riches, this passionate chase after 
exchange-value, 1 is common to the capitalist and the miser; 
but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the 
capitalist is a rational miser. The never-ending augmentation 
of exchange-value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to 
save 2 his money from circulation, is attained by the more acute 
capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circulation. 3 

The independent form, i.e., the money -form, which the value 
of commodities assumes in the case of simple circulation, serves 
only one purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes in the 
linal result of the movement. On the other hand, in the circula- 
tion ]>l — C — M, both the money and the commodity represent 
only different modes of existence of value itself, the money its 
general mode, and the commodity its particular, or, so to say, 
disguised mode. 4 It is constantly changing from one form to 
the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus assumes an 
automatically active character. If now we take in turn each 
of the two different forms which self-expanding value suc- 
ively assumes in the course of its life, we then arrive at 
these two propositions: Capital is money: Capital is com- 
modities. 5 In truth, however, value is here the active factor in 
a process, in which, while constantly assuming the form in turn 
of money and commodities, it at the same time changes in 
magnitude, differentiates itself by throwing off surplus-value 
from itself; the original value ; in other words, expands spon- 
taneously. For the movement, in the course of which it add* 
surplus value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, in 

1 "Tin: inextinguishable passion for gain, the auri sacra fames, will always lead 
capitalists. " ( MacCulloch : "The principles of Polit. BcOB. M London, 1830, p. 17 ( .i. ) This 
view, of COane, doei not prevent the same MacCulloch and others of his kidney, 
when in theoretical difficulties, such, for example, as the question of over-production. 
from transforming the same capitalist Into ■ moral citizen, whose sole oonc* mi i> for 
ass values, and who even developes an insatiable hunger for boots, hats. hc<>. 

and othei extremely familiar sorts of nsa-vahu a 

' l*£u» is a characteristic Greek expression for hoarding. So in English t<> 
haH the ami tw> meanings i snufei and epargner. 

3 " Questo infinite che le cose uoo hanno in p >. hanno in giro." [( (aliani.) 

4 " ( • in i ' pas la matiere qui fail i<' capital, mail la valour de oes matii res." (J. 

y; "Traitedel'Econ, Polit M 8 erne. Id. Paris, Utt7, t. l., p. 428 
Ourrenc] (!) employed in prodncing articles ... is capital." (MacLeod ; ' 
< ry and Practice oi Banking London, 1865, t. L, oh. i.,p. 56.) "Capitalise 
modi ties." (James Mill : " Elements of PoL Boon." Loud., 1821, p. 74.) 



132 Capitalist Production. 

automatic expansion. Because it is value, it has acquired the 
occult quality of being able to add value to itself. It brings 
forth living offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs. 

Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, 
and assuming at one time the form of money, at another that 
of commodities, but through all these changes preserving itself 
and expanding, it requires some independent form, by means of 
which its identity may at any time be established. And this 
form it possesses only in the shape of money. It is under the 
form of money that value begins and ends, and begins again, 
every act of its own spontaneous generation. It began by 
being £100, it is now £110 > and so on. But the money itself 
is only one of the two forms of value. Unless it takes the form 
of some commodity, it does not become capital. There is here 
no antagonism, as in the case of hoarding, between the money 
and commodities. The capitalist knows that all commodities, 
however scurvy they ma} T look, or however badly they may 
smell, are in faith and in truth money, inwardly circumcised 
Jews, and what is more, a wonderful means whereby out of 
money to make more money. 

In simple circulation, — M — C, the value of commodities 
attained at the most a form independent of their use-values, i.e., 
the form of money ; but that same value now in the circulation 
M — C — M, or the circulation of capital, suddenly presents itsel 
as an independent substance, endowed with a motion of its own, 
passing through a life-process of its own, in which money anc 
commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in 
turn. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations 
of commodities, it enters now, so to say, into private relations 
with itself. It differentiates itself as original value from itsell 
as surplus-value; as the father differentiates himself from himseli 
qua the son, yet both are one and of one age: for only by the surplus 
value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become capital, 
and so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the 
son, the father, is begotten, so soon does their difference vanish 
and they again become one, £110. 

Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in pro 
cess, and, as such, capital. It comes out of circulation, enter! 



Contradictions in the Formula of Capital. 133 

into it again, preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, 
comes back out of it with expanded bulk, and begins the same 
round ever afresh. 1 M — M', money which begets money, 
such is the description of Capital from the mouths of its first 
interpreters, the Mercantilists. 

Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order 
to sell dearer, M — C — M', appears certainly to be a form 
peculiar to one kind of capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. 
But industrial capital too is money, that is changed into com- 
modities, and by the sale of these commodities, is re-converted 
into more money. The events that take place outside the 
sphere of circulation, in the interval between the buying and 
selling, do not affect the form of this movement. Lastly, in the 
case of interest-bearing capital, the circulation M — C — M' 
appears abridged. We have its result without the intermediate 
stage, in the form M — M', " en style lapidaire " so to say, money 
that is worth more money, value that is greater than itself. 

M — C — M' is therefore in reality the general formula of 
capital as it appears prima facie within the sphere of circulation. 



CHAPTER V. 

CONTRADICTIONS IN THE GENERAL FORMULA OF CAPITAL. 

The form which circulation takes when money becon,' 
capital, is opposed to all the laws we have hitherto investigated 
bearing on the nature of commodities, value and money, and 
even of circulation itself. What distinguishes this form from 
that of the simple circulation of commodities, is the inverted 
order of succession of the two antithetical processes, sale and 
purchase. How can this purely forma] distinction between 
these processes change their character as it were by magic I 
lint that 1- not all. This inversion has no existence for tw 1 

out oi the three persons who t ran act busine ether. A 

capital] t. I luy commodities from A and sell them again to B, 

1 ( 'i|. | ii : " portion fruetifi.wit'' <!■• 1.1 ricb< imoltt . . . retail 

■altiplUnU.* 1 (Stanondl 1 "Noqymoj prineipef d« L'toon, polit," t. i., p, 



i 34 Capitalist Production. 

but as a simple owner of commodities, I sell them to B and then 
purchase fresh ones from A. A and B see no difference 
between the two sets of transactions. Tbey are merely buyers 
or sellers. And I on each occasion meet them as a mere owner 
of either money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, 
what is more, in both sets of transactions, I am opposed to A 
only as a buyer and to B only as a seller, to the one only as 
money, to the other only as commodities, and to neither of 
them as capital or a capitalist, or as representative of anything 
that is more than money or commodities, or that can produce 
any effect beyond what money and commodities can. For me 
the purchase from A and the sale to B are part of a series. 
But the connexion between the two acts exists for me alone. 
A does not trouble himself about my transaction with B, nor 
does B about my business with A. And if I offered to explain 
to them the meritorious nature of my action in inverting the 
order of succession, they would probably point out to me that 
I was mistaken as to that order of succession, and that the 
whole transaction, instead of beginning with a purchase and 
ending with a sale, be^an, on the contrary, with a sale and was 
concluded with a purchase. In truth, my first act, the purchase, 
was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my second act, the 
sale, was from the standpoint of B, a purchase. Not content 
with that, A and B would declare that the whole series was 
superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus ; that for the future 
A would buy direct from B, and B sell direct to A. Thus the 
whole transaction would be reduced to a single act forming an 
isolated, non-complemented phase in the ordinary circulation 
of commodities, a mere sale from A's point of view, and from 
B's, a mere purchase. The inversion, therefore, of the order of 
succession, does not take us outside the sphere of the simple 
circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether 
there is in this simple circulation anything permitting an ex- 
pansion of the value that enters into circulation, and, con- 
sequently, a creation of surplus-value. 

Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which 
it presents itself as a simple and direct exchange of commodities. 
This is always the case when two owners of commodities buy 



Contradictions in the Formula of Capital. 135 

from each other, and on the settling day the amounts mutually 
owing are equal and cancel each other. The money in this 
case is money of account and serves to express the value of the 
commodities by their prices, but is not, itself, in the shape of 
hard cash, confronted with them. So far as regards use- values, 
it is clear that both parties may gain some advantage. Both 
part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service to them, 
and receive others that they can make use of. And there may 
also be a further gain. A, who sells wine and buys corn, 
possibly produces more wine, with given labour time, than 
farmer B could, and B, on the other hand, more corn than 
wine-grower A could. A, therefore, may get, for the same 
exchange value, more corn, and B more wine, than each would 
respectivel}' get without any exchange by producing his own 
corn and wine. With reference, therefore, to use-value, there 
is good ground for saying that tl exchange is a transaction by 
which both sides ^ain." ■ It is otherwise with exchange-value. 
"A man who has plenty of wine and no corn treats with a man 
who has plenty of corn and no wine ; an exchange takes place 
between them of corn to the value of 50, for wine of the same 
value. This act produces no increase of exchange-value either 
for the one or the other; for each of them already possessed, 
before the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired 
by means of that operation." 2 The result is not altered by 
introducing money, as a medium of circulation, between the 
commodities, and making the sale and the purchase two distinct 
acts. 3 The value of a commodity is expressed in its price 
before it goes into circulation, and is therefore a precedent 
condition of circulation, not its result. 4 

Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances 
not immediately flowing from the laws of the simple circulation 
of commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except, 

1 "!/>'•( ibftnge est Dili I ruisurtioii admirable dftM IftqUftlle Im d'.-nx 0Oll1 1 .tct.uiN 

nt. toujour! (!) " (Deatntt da Traey : "Trait6 da lft Volonte el dc mm effete." 
P IB, p. <;s.) Thii work ftppeftred ftfterwftrdt ft* " Tnit6 da l*Boon. I'olit." 

1 " ll< I- lei '1 !;i Eth !'!'•," 1. c |>. 54 1. 

BM Qu« I'une dc oei deox Taleure soft argent, on qn'ellee eoient tootee deux roar 
ahaudiaei niuellea,riendepltii Indifferent sneoL" (" Bferoiei dele EUi lere t H Lo p. Mil ) 

«"('•• Qi , ,n! p otrftotftnta qui prononoont nr la nUaur ; alia eat d< 

av.-int i,i ((.nvntion." (" I,.- Troene," I'. "<>''..) 



136 Capitalist Production. 

the replacing of one use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, 
a mere change in the form of the commodity. The same 
exchange value, i.e., the same quantity of incorporated social 
labour, remains throughout in the hands of the owner of the 
commodity, first in the shape of his own commodity, then in 
the form of the money for which he exchanged it, and lastly, 
in the shape of the commodity he buys with that money. 
This change of form does not imply a change in the magnitude 
of the value. But the change, which the value of the 
commodity undergoes in this process, is limited to a change in 
its money form. This form exists first as the price of the com- 
modity offered for sale, then as an actual sum of money, which, 
however, was already expressed in the price, and lastly, as the 
price of an equivalent commodity. This change of form no 
more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, 
than does the change of a £5 note into sovereigns, half sove- 
reigns and shillings. So far therefore as the circulation of 
commodities effects a change in the form alone of their values, 
and is free from disturbing influences, it must be the exchange 
of equivalents. Little as Vulgar-Economy knows about the 
nature of value, yet whenever it wishes to consider the 
phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes that supply 
and demand are equal, which amounts to this, that their effect 
is nil. If therefore, as regards the use- values exchanged, both 
buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the 
case as regards the exchange values. Here we must rather say, 
" Where equality exists there can be no gain." x It is true, 
commodities may be sold at prices deviating from their values, 
but these deviations are to be considered as infractions of the 
laws of the exchange of commodities/ which in its normal 
state is an exchange of equivalents, consequently, no method 
for increasing value. 3 

Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent the 

1 " Dove e egualita non d lucro.'' (Galiani, "Delia Moneta in Custodi, Parte 
Moderna," t. iv. p. 244.) 

3 "L'echange devient ddsavantageux pour l'une des parties, lorsque quelque chose 
etrangere vient diminuer ou exagerer le prix ; alors l'egalite est blesstie, mais la lesion 
procede de cette cause et non de recharge. " (" Le Trosne," 1. c. p. 904.) 

3 "L'echange est de sa nature un contrat d'egalitc qui so fait de valeur pour valour 
egale. II n'est done pas un moyen de s'enrichir, puisque Ton donne autant que Ton 
recoit." (" Le Trosne," L c. p. U03.) 



Contradictions in the Formula of Capital, 137 

circulation of commodities as a source of surplus-value, there 
lurks a quid pro quo, a mixing up of use-value and exchange- 
value. For instance, Cond iliac says : " It is not true that on 
an exchange of commodities we give value for value. On the 
contrary, each of the two contracting parties in every case, 
gives a less for a greater value. ... If we really exchanged 
equal values, neither party could make a profit. And yet, they 
both gain, or ought to gain. Why ? The value of a thing 
consists solely in its relation to our wants. What is more to 
the one is less to the other, and vice versd. ... It is not to be 
assumed that we offer for sale articles required for our own 
consumption. . . . We wish to part with a useless thing, in 
order to get one that we need ; we want to give less for more. 
. . . It was natural to think that, in an exchange, value was 
given for value, whenever each of the articles exchanged was 
of equal value with the same quantity of gold. . . . But there 
is another point to be considered in our calculation. The 
question is, whether we both exchange something superfluous 
for something necessary." 1 We see in this passage, how Con- 
dillac not onlv confuses use-value with exchange-value, but 
in a really childish manner assumes, that in a society, in which 
the production of commodities is well developed, each producer 
produces his own means of subsistence, and throws into circu- 
lation only the excess over his own requirements. 2 Still, 
Condillac's argument is frequently used by modern economists, 
more especially when the point is to show, that the exchange 
of commodities in its developed form, commerce, is productive 
of surplus-value. For instance, "Commerce . . . . adds value to 
products, for the same products in the hands of consumers, are 
worth more than in the hands of producers, and it may strictly 

1 Cond iliac : " Le Commerce et le Gouvernement " (1770). Edit. Dairo et Molinari 
• n the " Melanges u"Econ. Polii." Park, 1847, p. 2G7, etc. 

* LeTi o ne, therefore, answers his friend Oondillac with justice as follows: "Dans 
une . . . eooiete formes il n'y a pas de inrabondant en aucun genre." At the nine time. 
In a bantering way, he remarks : "If hoth the persons who exchango reoerre more 

le in equal amount, and part with less to an equal amount, they Ik. th get the s:uno." 

It is be< > ' Condillae hai not the remotest Idea of the nature of exchange value 
that he lias been chosen by Hon Professor Wilhelm Boscber as a proper person 
t«, answer for the soundness of his own ohildith notions. bV I Eti hor'i "Die CruuJ- 
lagen dor rfationaldkonomio, l>iittu Auflage," \s~>S. 



J 



S Capitalist Production. 



be considered an act of production." 1 But commodities are not 
paid for twice over, once on account of their use-value, and 
again on account of their value. And though the use-value of 
*\ commodit} r is more serviceable to the buyer than to the 
seller, its money form is more serviceable to the seller. Would 
ho otherwise sell it? We might therefore just as well say 
that the buyer performs " strictly an act of production," by 
converting stockings, for example, into money. 

If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange- 
value, and consequently equivalents, are exchanged, it is plain 
that no one abstracts more value from, than he throws into, 
circulation. There is no creation of surplus-value. And, in 
its normal form, the circulation of commodities demands the 
exchange of equivalents. But in actual practice, the process 
does not retain its normal form. Let us, therefore, assume an 
exchange of non-equivalents. 

In any case the market for commodities is only frequented 
by owners of commodities, and the power which these persons 
exercise over each other, is no other than the power of their 
commodities. The material variety of these commodities is 
the material incentive to the act of exchange, and makes 
buyers and sellers mutually dependent, because none of them 
possesses the object of his own wants, and each holds in his 
hand the object of another's wants. Besides these material 
differences of their use- values, there is only one other difference 
between commodities, namely, that between their bodily form 
and the form into which they are converted by sale, the differ- 
ence between commodities and money. And consequently the 
owners of commodities are distinguishable only as sellers, those 
who own commodities, and buyers, those who own money. 

Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller 
is enabled to sell his commodities above their value, what is 
worth 100 for 110, in which case the price is nominally raised 
10%. The seller therefore pockets a surplus value of 10. 
But after he has sold he becomes a buyer. A third owner of 
commodities comes to him now as seller, who in this capacity 
also enjoys the privilege of selling his commodities 10% too 

1 S. P. Newman: "Elements of Tolit. Econ." Amlover and New York, 1835, p. 175. 



Contradictions in the Formula of Capital. 139 

dear. Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to lose it again as 
a buyer. 1 The nett result is, that all owners of commodities 
sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value, which 
comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true 
value. Such a general and nominal rise of prices has the same 
effect as if the values had been expressed in weight of silver 
instead of in weight of gold. The nominal prices of com- 
modities would rise, but the real relation between their values 
would remain unchanged. 

Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has 
the privilege of purchasing commodities under their value. 
In this case it is no longer necessary to bear in mind that he 
in his turn will become a seller. He was so before he became 
buyer ; he had already lost 10% in selling before he gained 
10% as buyer.* Everything is just as it was. 

'J lie creation of surplus-value, and therefore the conversion 
of money into capital, can consequently be explained neither 
on the assumption that commodities are sold above their value, 
nor that they are bought below their value. 3 

The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrele- 
vant matters after the manner of Col. Torrens : " Effectual 
demand consists in the power and inclination (!), on the part of 
Consumers, to give for commodities, either by immediate or 
circuitous barter, some greater portion of . . . capital than their 
production costs." 4 In relation to circulation, producers and 
consumers meet only ;l^ buyers and sellers. To assert that the 
BUrplus-value acquired by the producer has its origin in the 
[act that consumers pay for commodities more than their value, 

1 " P.y the augmentation of the nominal value of the produce . . . sellers not en- 
riched . . . since what they gain as sellers, they precisely expend in the quality of 
buyer*." (" The Beeential Principle! of the Wealth of Nation*, " fco., London, 17i»7, 
P . 66.) 

2 "Si Ton est force de donnCV pour IS livres tine quantitc de telle production qui 

'lit 21, loraqu'on empl meme argent ;i aoheter ( on aura egalement pour 

18 1. oc que ['on payait 34." (" I -• Tro no," 1. a. p. 897.) 

3 "Ohaque rend< u dc p ut done parrenir ft ranoherii babituellemenl mi manrmn- 
diseH, qu'en to eoumettani auad a payei habituellement plui oner lea marohandisef 

rendeura j et pai la mei a, ohaque ooneommateur m pent payer 

habituellement moini oharoe qu'il i i m eoumettant aussi a one diminu- 

tion mi mblable lurleprii dea ohoaaa qu'il •• n !." (" Mereierdela Rh <■:•■," 1. a. p. 

4 1:. Torrani 1 "An baay on the Production of Wraith." London, L821, . 



140 Capitalist Production. 

is only to say in other words : The owner of commodities pos- 
sesses, as a seller, the privilege of selling too dear. The seller 
has himself produced the commodities or represents their pro- 
ducer, but the buyer has to no less extent produced the com- 
modities represented by his money, or represents their pro- 
ducer. The distinction between them is, that one buys and 
the other sells. The fact that the owner of the commodities, 
under the designation of producer, sells them over their value, 
and under the designation of consumer, pays too much for 
them, does not carry us a single step further. 1 

To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that 
surplus- value has its origin in a nominal rise of prices or in the 
privilege which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume 
the existence of a class that only buys and does not sell, i.e., 
only consumes and does not produce. The existence of such a 
class is inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, 
viz., that of simple circulation. But let us anticipate. The 
money with which such a class is constantly making purchases, 
must constantly flow into their pockets, without any exchange, 
gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the commodity- 
owners themselves. To sell commodities above their value to 
such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the money 
previously given to it. 2 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a 
yearly money tribute to ancient Rome. With this money 
Rome purchased from them commodities, and purchased them 
too dear. The provincials cheated the Romans, and thus got 
back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion of 
the tribute. Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really 
cheated. Their goods were still paid for with their own money. 
That is not the way to get rich or to create surplus- value. 

Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where 

1 "The idea of profits being paid by the consumers, is, assuredly, very absurd. Who 
are the consu mers ? " (G. Ramsay : " An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth. " Edin- 
burgh, 183G, p. 1S3.) 

2 " When a man is in want of a demand, does Mr. Malthus recommend him to pay 
some other person to take off his goods?" is a question put by an angry disciple of 
Kicardo to Malthus, who, like his disciple, Parson Chalmers, economically glorifies 
this class of simple buyers or consumers. (See : 'An Inquiry into those principles re- 
specting the Nature of Demand and the necessity of Consumption, lately advocated 
by Mr. Malthus," &c. Loud., 1821, p. 55.) 



Contradictions in the Formula of Capital, 141 

sellers are also buyers, and buyers, sellers. Our difficulty may 
perhaps have arisen from treating the actors as personifications 
instead of as individuals. 

A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or C 
without their being able to retaliate. A sells wine worth £4-0 
to B, and obtains from him in exchange corn to the value of 
£50. A has converted his £40 into £50, has made more money 
out of less, and has converted his commodities into capital. 
Let us examine this a little more closely. Before the exchange 
we had £40 worth of wine in the hands of A, and £50 worth 
of corn in those of B, a total value of £90. After the exchange 
we have still the same total value of £90. The value in circula- 
tion has not increased by one iota, it is only distributed differ- 
ently between A and B. What is a loss of value to B is surplus- 
value to A ; what is " minus " to one is " plus " to the other. 
The same change would have taken place, if A, without the 
formality of an exchange, had directly stolen the £10 from B. 
The sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be aug- 
mented by any change in their distribution, any more than 
tiie quantity of the precious metals in a country by a Jew 
Belling a Queen Ann's farthing for a guinea. The capitalist 
class, as a whole, in any country, cannot over-reach themselves. 

Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. 
[f equivalents arc exchanged, no surplus-value results, and if 
non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus- value. 2 Circula- 
tion, or the exchange of commodities, begets no value. 3 

1 l> BStutt de Tracy, although, 01 ]" rhaps because, be was a member of the Institute, 
held the opposite view. He lays, industrial capitalists make profits because "they 

all K' 11 for mote than it has co.->t to produce. And to whom do they soil V In the 
ftrtt instance to one another." (1. c. , p. 239.) 

* " L'echange qui SO fait de deux valettl nte ni ne diminue la masse 

dct vulcurs lubsistantei dam la eoeiete. L'echange de dettx valeura inegales . . . 
1 •• i bange rien dod plus I la somme det raleurs sooiales, bien qui! ajoute I la fortune 
da htnoequl] ote de la fortune de Taut re." (J. B. Say, 1. e. t. L, pp. 844, 845.) Baj . 
i ot in the 1( ael troubli <l aa to the eonaeqnenoea of this statement, borrowi it, almost 
arord f«»i arord, from the Physiocrats. Thefollowing< sample will shew how Monsieur 
turned to aeoount the arritingi of the Physiocrats, in his day quite forgotti a, f< i 
thepurpow of expanding the " value M of hia own. Hismi rated saying, " On 

dee produits qu'avec dee produite " (1. c, t. IL, p >- runs as folios 
rial phyiiocratio work : "Lcsproduotionanese patent qu'avi 
,"1. c, p. 899.) 
*"' i confers no valu< m products." (F. Way land: "1 

,,f P in \ " Boston, L868, p, 168.) 



142 Capitalist Production. 

The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the 
standard form of capital, the form under which it determines 
the economical organisation of modern society, we entirely 
left out of consideration its most popular, and, so to say, ante- 
diluvian forms, merchants' capital and money-lenders' capital 

The circuit M — C — M', buying in order to sell dearer, is seen 
most clearly in genuine merchants' capital. But the movement 
takes place entirely within the sphere of circulation. Since, 
however, it is impossible, by circulation alone, to account for 
the conversion of money into capital, for the formation of 
surplus- value, it would appear, that merchants' capital is an 
impossibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged; 1 that, there- 
fore, it can only have its origin in the twofold advantage 
gained, over both the selling and the buying producers, by the 
merchant who parasitically shoves himself in between them. 
It is in this sense that Franklin says, " war is robbery, 
commerce is generally cheating." 2 If the transformation of 
merchants' money into capital is to be explained otherwise 
than by the producers being simply cheated, a long series of 
intermediate steps would be necessary, which, at present, when 
the simple circulation of commodities forms our only assump- 
tion, are entirely wanting. 

What we have said with reference to merchants' capital, 
applies still more to mone3~-lenders' capital. In merchants' 
capital, the two extremes, the money that is thrown upon the 
market, and the augmented money that is withdrawn from the 
market, are at least connected by a purchase and a sale, in 
other words by the movement of the circulation. In money- 
lenders' capital the form M — C — W is reduced to the two ex- 
tremes without a mean, M — M', money exchanged for more 
money, a form that is incompatible with the nature of money, 
and therefore remains inexplicable from the standpoint of the 
circulation of commodities. Hence Aristotle : " since chrema- 

1 Under the rule of invariable equivalents commerce would be impossible. (G. 
Opdyke: "A Treatise on Polit. Economy." New York, 1851, p. 66-69.) " The difference 
between real value and exchange value is based upon this fact, namely, that the 
value of a tiling is different from the so-called equivalent given for it in trade, i.e., 
that this equivalent is no equivalent." (F. Engels, 1. c. p. 96.) 

2 Benjamin Franklin : Works, Vol. II. edit. Sparks in li Positions to be examined 
concerning National Wealth," p. 376. 



Contradictions in the Formula of Capital, j 43 

tistic is a double science, one part belonging to commerce, the 
other to economic, the latter being necessary and praiseworthy, 
the former based on circulation and with justice disapproved 
(for it is not based on Nature, but on mutual cheating), there- 
fore the usurer is most rightly hated, because money itself is 
the source of his gain, and is not used for the purposes for 
which it was invented. For it originated for the exchange of 
commodities, but interest makes out of money, more money. 
Hence its name («*«* interest and offspring). For the be- 
gotten are like those who beget them. But interest is money 
of money, so that of all modes of making a living, this is the 
most contrary to nature." 1 

In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both 
merchants' capital and interest-bearing capital are derivative 
forms, and at the same time it will become clear, why these 
two forms appear in the course of history before the modern 
standard form of capital. 

We have shown that surplus-value cannot be created by 
circulation, and, therefore, that in its formation, something 
must take place in the background, which is not apparent in 
the circulation itself. 2 But can surplus-value possibly originate 
anywhere else than in circulation, which is the sum total of all 
the mutual relations of commodity-owners, as far as they are 
determined by their commodities ? Apart from circulation, 
the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own com- 
modity. So far as regards value, that relation is limited to 
this, that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, 
that quantity being measured by a definite social standard. 
This quantity is expressed by the value of the commodity, and 
since the value is reckoned in money of account, this quantity 
is also expressed by the price, which we will suppose to be £10. 
But his Labour is not represented both by the value of the 
commodity, and by a surplus over that value, not by a price of 
10 that is also a price of 11, not by a value that is greater than 
itself. The commodity owner can, by his labour, create value, 

1 Aristotle, 1. c. c. 10. 
" Profit, in tin- usual condition of the market, ir> not made bj HEohABgiBg II k' 

It not exuded before, ucitlici could it al'tci that Uun.sactiou. " (lLim. .s\ , 1. c.,|». L84. 



144 Capitalist Production. 

but not self-expanding value. He can increase the value of his 
commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more value 
to the value in hand, by making, for instance, leather into 
boots. The same material has now more value, because it 
contains a greater quantity of labour. The boots have there- 
fore more value than the leather, but the value of the leather 
remains what it was ; it has not expanded itself, has not, 
during the making of the boots, annexed surplus value. It is 
therefore impossible that outside the sphere of circulation, a 
producer of commodities can, without coming into contact with 
other commodity owners, expand value, and consequently con- 
vert money or commodities into capital. 

It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by cir- 
culation, and it is equally impossible for it to originate apart 
from circulation. It must have its origin both in circulation 
and yet not in circulation. 

We have, therefore, got a double result. 

The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on 
the basis of the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities. 
in such a way that the starting point is the exchange of 
equivalents. 1 Our friend, Moneybags, who as yet is only an 
embryo capitalist, must buy his commodities at their value, 
must sell them at their value, and yet at the end of the pro- 
cess must withdraw more value from circulation than he threw 



1 From the foregoing investigation, the reader will see that this statement only means 
that the formation of capital must be possible even though the price and value of a 
commodity be the same ; for its formation cannot be attributed to any deviation of 
the one from the other. If prices actually differ from values, we must, first of all, 
reduce the former to the latter, in other words, treat the difference as accidental in 
order that the phenomena may be observed in their purity, and our observations not 
interfered with by disturbing circumstances that have nothing to do with the process 
in question. We know, moreover, that this reduction is no mere scientific process. 
The continual oscillations in prices, their rising and falling, compensate each other, 
and reduce themselves to an average price, which is their hidden regulator. It forms 
the guiding star of the merchant or the manufacturer in every undertaking that re- 
quires time. lie knows that when a long period of time is taken, commodities are 
sold neither over nor under, but at their average price. If therefore he thought about 
the matter at all, he would formulate the problem of the formation of capital as 
follows : How can we account for the origin of capital on the supposition that prices 
are regulated by the average price, i.e., ultimately by the value of the commodities? 
I say " ultimately," because average piices do not directly coincide with the values of 
commodities, as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believe. 



The Buying and Selling of Labour- Power. 145 

nto it at starting. His development into a full-grown capi- 
,alist must take place, both within the sphere of circulation 
md without it. These are the conditions of the problem. 
Hie Rhodus, hie salta ! 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE BUYING AND SELLING OF LABOUR-POWER. 

The change of value that occurs in the case of money intended 
to be converted into capital, cannot take place in the money 
itself, since in its function of means of purchase and of pay- 
ment, it does no more than realise the price of the commodity 
it buys or pays for ; and, as hard cash, it is value petrified, 
never varying. 1 . Just as little can it originate in the second 
act of circulation, the re-sale of the commodity, which does 
no more than transform the article from its bodily form back 
again into its money-form. The change must, therefore, take 
place in the commodity bought by the first act, M — C, but not 
in its value, for equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity 
is paid for at its full value. We are, therefore, forced to the 
conclusion that the change originates in the use-value, as such, 
of the commodity, i.e., in its consumption. In order to be able 
to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our 
friend, Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the 
sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity, whose use- 
value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of 
value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an em- 
bodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. 
The possessor of money does find on the market such a special 
commodity in capacity for labour or labour-power. 

]\y labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood 
the aggregate of those mental and physical capabilities exist- 
ing in a human being, which In; exercise.^ whenever he 

produces a use-value of any description, 

" in tin- form <»f numty otpittJ ii prodvofttri of no profit. ' (Bioardo a 

" Prlno, of l'ol. Boon. 11 1>. 267.) 

I 



146 Capitalist Production. 

But in order that our owner of money may be able to find 
labour-power offered for sale as a commodity, various conditions 
must first be fulfilled. The exchange of commodities of itself 
implies no other relations of dependence than those which 
result from its own nature. On this assumption, labour-power 
can appear upon the market as a commodity, only if, and so 
far as, its possessor, the individual whose labour-power it is, 
offers it for sale, or sells it, as a commodity. In order that he 
may be able to do this, he must have it at his disposal, must 
be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.e., of 
his person. 1 He and the owner of money meet in the market, 
and deal with each other as on the basis of equal rights, with 
this difference alone, that one is buyer, the other seller; both, 
therefore, equal in the eyes of the law. The continuance of 
this relation demands that the owner of the labour-power 
should sell it only for a definite period, for if he were to sell it 
rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling himself, 
converting himself from a free man into a slave, from an owner 
of a commodity into a commodity. He must constantly look 
upon his labour-power as his own property, his own commodity, 
and this he can only do by placing it at the disposal of the buyer 
temporarily, for a definite period of time. By this means alone 
can he avoid renouncing his rights of ownership over it. 2 

1 In encyclopaedias of classical antiquities we find such nonsense as this — that in 
the ancient world capital was fully developed, " except that the free labourer and a 
system of credit was wanting." Mommsen also, in his "History of Rome," commits, 
in this respect, one blunder after another. 

2 Hence legislation in various countries fixes a maximum for labour-contracts. 
Wherever free labour is the rule, the laws regulate the mode of terminating this con- 
tract. In some States, particularly in Mexico (before the American Civil War, also in 
the territories taken from Mexico, and also, as a matter of fact, in the Danubian 
provinces till the revolution effected by Kusa), slavery is hidden under the form of 
peonage. By means of advances, repayable in labour, which are handed down 
from generation to generation, not only the individual labourer, but his family 
become, de facto, the property of other persons and their families. Juarez abolish*- J 
peonage. The so-called Emperor Maximilian re-established it by a decree, which, iu 
the House of Representatives at Washington, was aptly denounced as a decree for the 
re-introduction of slavery into Mexico. " I may make over to another the use, 
for a limited time, of my particular bodily and mental aptitudes and capabilities 
because, in consequence of this restriction, they are impressed with a character of 
alienation with regard to me as a whole. But by the alienation of all my labour- 
time and the whole of my work, I should be converting the substance itself, in othei 
words, my general activity and reality, my person, into the property of another ' 
(Hegel, " Vhilosophie des Rechts." Berlin, 1840, p. 104 § 07.) 



The Buying and Selling of Labour- Power. 147 

The second essential condition to the owner of money 
finding labour-power in the market as a commodity is this — 
that the labourer instead of being in the position to sell com- 
modities in which his labour is incorporated, must be obliged 
to offer for sale as a commodity that very labour-power, which 
exists only in his living self. 

In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other 
than labour-power, he must of course have the means of 
production, as raw material, implements, &c. No boots can 
be made without leather. He requires also the means of 
subsistence. Nobody — not even " a musician of the future " — 
can live upon future products, or upon use-values in an un- 
finished state ; and ever since the first moment of his appearance 
on the world's stage, man always has been, and must still be 
a consumer, both before and while he is producing. In a 
society where all products assume the form of commodities, 
these commodities must be sold after they have been produced ; 
it is only after their sale that they can serve in satisfying the 
requirements of their producer. The time necessary for their 
sale is superadded to that necessary for their production. 

For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the 
owner of money must meet in the market with the free 
labourer, free in the double sense, that as a free man he can 
dispose of his labour-power as his own commodity, and that on 
the other hand he has no other commodity for sale, is short 
of everything necessary for the realisation of his labour- 
power. 

The question why this free labourer confronts him in the 
market, has no interest for the owner of money, who regards 
the labour market as a branch of the general market for com- 
modities. And for the present it interests us just as Little. 
\W ding to the fact theoretically, as he does practically. One 
thing, however, is clear — nature does not produce on the one 
tide owners of money <»r commodities, and on the other men 
ing nothing but their own labour-power, This relation 
no natural basis, neither is its social basis one thai is 
common to all historical periods. It is clearly the result of a 
neal development, the product of many economical 



14S Capitalist Production. 

revolutions, of the extinction of a whole series of older forms 
of social production. 

So, too, the economical categories, already discussed by us, 
bear the stamp of history. Definite historical conditions are 
necessary that a product may become a commodity. It must 
not be produced as the immediate means of subsistence of the 
producer himself. Had we gone further, and inquired under 
what circumstances all, or even the majority of products take 
the form of commodities, we should have found that this can 
only happen with production of a very specific kind, capitalist 
production. Such an inquiry, however, would have been 
foreign to the analysis of commodities. Production and 
circulation of commodities can take place, although the great 
mass of the objects produced are intended for the immediate 
requirements of their producers, are not turned into commodi- 
ties, and consequently social production is not yet by a long 
way dominated in its length and breadth by exchange-value. 
The appearance of products as commodities presupposes such a, 
development of the social division of labour, that the separation 
of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which first 
begins with barter, must already have been completed. Bu1 
such a degree of development is common to many forms of 
society, which in other respects present the most varyim 
historical features. On the other hand, if we consider money 
its existence implies a definite stage in the exchange o 
commodities. The particular functions of money which 
performs, either as the mere equivalent of commodities, or a< 
means of circulation, or means of payment, as hoard or a 
universal money, point, according to the extent and relativ 
preponderance of the one function or the other, to ver 
different stages in the process of social production. Yet w 
know by experience that a circulation of commodities relativel; 
primitive, suffices for the production of all these forms. Othei 
wise witli capital. The historical conditions of its existent 1 
are by no means given with the mere circulation of money an 
commodities. It can spring into life, only when the owner <| 
the means of production and subsistence meets in the mar 
with the free labourer selling his labour-power. And this or; 



The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power. 149 

historical condition comprises a world's history. Capital, 
therefore, announces from its first appearance a new epoch in 
the process of social production. l 

We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, 
labour-power. Like all others it has a value. 2 How is that 
value determined ? 

The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of 
every other commodity, by the labour-time necessary for the 
production, and consequently also the reproduction, of this 
special article. So far as it has value, it represents no more 
than a definite quantity of the average labour of society 
incorporated in it. Labour-power exists only as a capacity, 01 
power of the living individual. Its production consequently 
presupposes his existence. Given the individual, the produc- 
tion of labour-power consists in his reproduction of himself or 
his maintenance. For his maintenance he requires a given 
quantity of the means of subsistence. Therefore the labour- 
time requisite for the production of labour-power reduces itself 
to that necessary for the production of those means of 
subsistence; in other words, the value of labour-power is the 
value of the means of subsistence necessary for the mainten- 
ance of tin- lab urer. Labour-power, however, becomes a 
reality only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by 
working. Hut thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, 
nerve, brain, &c., is wasted, and these require to be restored. 
This increased expenditure demands a larger income. 1 It' the 
owner of labour-power works to-day, to-morrow he must again 
be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as 
regards health and strength. His means of subsistence must, 
therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal Btat 

I The capitalist epoch is therefore characterised bj this, th.it labour-power u 
mi ti ; ■ the labourer himaeli the form nmodity whieh is hie prop* 

bielaboui entry becomes wage labour. <>ii the other hand, it isonlj 

this moment thai the produoe of labour universally hi comes a commodity. 
The value or w<>i th of a man, is as of all other things hii price that I 
inch as would be given for the use of hit power." (Th. Sobbei ' i tthai 
w"< th. Lond. LS80 11, \. UL, p. 7<'..) 

Elena the Roman trillions, ei overlooks "f the u^i i*nl t i 
'more meagre Care than working slnn ill pork irai U 

Momrnw a i; no. I •■ * bi< b1 p. >iu.) 



150 Capitalist Production. 

a labouring individual. His natural wants, such as {<><»], 
clothing, fuel, and housing, vary according to the climatic and 
other physical conditions of his country. On the other hand, 
the number and extent of his so-called necessary wants, as also 
the modes of satisfying them, are themselves the product of 
historical development, and depend therefore to a great extent 
on the degree of civilisation of a country, more particularly on 
the conditions under which, and consequently on the habits and 
degree of comfort in which, the class of free labourers has been 
formed. ■ In contradistinction therefore to the case of other 
commodities, there enters into the determination of the value 
of labour-power a historical and moral element. Nevertheless, 
in a given country, at a given period, the average quantity oi 
the means of subsistence necessary for the labourer is 
practically known. 

The owner of labour-power is mortal. If then his appear- 
ance in the market is to be continuous, and the continuous con- 
version of money into capital assumes this, the seller of labour^ 
power must perpetuate himself, "in the way that every livinj 
individual perpetuates himself, by procreation." 2 The laboui 
power withdrawn from the market by wear and tear an 
death, must be continually replaced by, at the very least, ai 
equal amount of fresh labour-power. Hence the sum of tin 
means of subsistence necessary for the production of labour 
power must include the means necessary for the labourer 
substitutes, i.e., his children, in order that this race of peculia 
commodity-owners may perpetuate its appearance in tli 
market. 3 

In order to modify the human organism, so that it may a< 
quire skill and handiness in a given branch of industry, an 
become labour-power of a special kind, a special education 
training is requisite, and this, on its part, costs an equivalen 

1 Compare W. H. Thornton: "Overpopulation ami its Remedy," Loud., 1846. 

2 Petty. 

3 " Its (labour's) natural price. . . . consists in such a quantity of necessari 
and comforts of life, as, from the nature of the climate, ami the habits of the cou 
try, are necessary to support the Labourer, and to enable him to rear such a fami 
:is may preserve, in the market, an undiminished supply of labour." (R. Torren 
"An Essay on the external Corn Trade." Loud., 1815, p. G2.) The word labour 
here wrongly used for labour-power. 



The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power. 1 5 1 

in commodities of a greater or less amount. This amount 
varies according to the more or less complicated character of 
the labour-power. The expenses of this education (excessively 
small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro tanto 
into the total value spent in its production. 

The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a 
definite quantity of the means of subsistence. It therefore 
varies with the value of these means or with the quantity of 
labour requisite for their production. 

Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are 
consumed daily, and a fresh supply must be provided 
daily. Others such as clothes and furniture last for 
longer periods and require to be replaced only at longer in- 
tervals. One article must be bought or paid for daily, another 
weekly, another quarterly, and so on. But in whatever way 
the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the year, 
they must be covered by the average income, taking one day 
with another. If the total of the commodities required daily 
for the production of labour-power=A, and those required 
\veekly=B, and those required quarterly=C, and so on, the 
daily average of these commodities = 3 «?a+52b+4c+ao. Suppose 
that in this mass of commodities requisite for the average day 
there are embodied 6 hours of social labour, then there is incor- 
porated daily in labour-power half a day's average social labour, 
in other words, half a day's labour is requisite for the daily 
production of labour-power. This quantity of labour forms 
the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the labour- 
power daily reproduced. If half a day's average social labour is 
incorporated in three shillings, then three shillings is the pric 1 
corresponding to the value of a day's labour-power. If its 
Owner therefore offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its 
tolling price is equal to its value, and according to our sup- 
bion, our friend Moneybags, who is intent upon converting 
his three shillings into capital, pays this value. 

The minimum limit <>f the value <>f Labour-power is de 
termined by the value of the commodities, without the daily 
supply of which the Labourer cannot renew his vital enei 
equently by the value of those means of subsistence that 



152 Capitalist Production. 

are physically indispensable. If the price of labour-power fall 
to this minimum, it falls below its value, since under such cir- 
cumstances it can be maintained and developed only in a 
crippled state. But the value of every commodity is deter- 
mined by the labour-time requisite to turn it out so as to be of 
normal quality. 

It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this 
method of determining the value of labour-power, a method 
prescribed by the very nature of the case, to be a brutal 
method, and which wails with Rossi that, "To comprehend 
capacity for labour (puissance de travail) at the same time 
that we make abstraction from the means of subsistence of the 
labourers during the process of production, is to comprehend a 
phantom (etre de raison). When we speak of labour, or 
capacity for labour, we speak at the same time of the labourer 
and his means of subsistence, of labourer and wages." 1 When 
we speak of capacity for labour, we do not speak of labour, any 
more than when we speak of capacity for digestion, we speak 
of digestion. The latter process requires something more than 
a good stomach. When we speak of capacity for labour, we do 
not abstract from the necessary means of subsistence. On the 
contrary, their value is expressed in its value. If his capacity 
for labour remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit from 
it, but rather he will feel it to be a cruel nature-imposed 
necessity that this capacity has cost for its production a de- 
finite amount of the means of subsistence and that it \v ill con- 
tinue to do so for its reproduction. He will then agree with 
Sismondi : " that capacity for labour. ... is nothing unless it 
is sold." 2 

One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a 
commodity is, that its use-value does not, on the conclusion of 
the contract between the buyer and seller, immediately pass 
into the hands of the former. Its value, like that of every 
other commodity, is already fixed before it goes into circula- 
tion, since a definite quantity of social labour has been spent 
upon it; but its use-value consists in the subsequent exercise of 

1 Kossi. " Cours d'Econ. Tolit : " P.ruxelles, 1S42, \\ 370. 

2 Sismomli : " NottV. Pi inc. etc," t. I. p. 112. 



The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power. 153 

its force. The alienation of labour-power and its actual appro- 
priation by the buyer, its employment as a use-value, are 
separated by an interval of time. But in those cases in which 
the formal alienation by sale of the use-value of a commodity, is 
not simultaneous with its actual delivery to the buyer, the 
money of the latter usually functions as means of payment. 1 
In every country in which the capitalist mode of production 
reigns, it is the custom not to pay for labour-power before it 
has been exercised for the period fixed by the contract, as for 
example, the end of each week. In all cases, therefore, the use- 
value of the labour-power is advanced to the capitalist : the 
labourer allows the buyer to consume it before he receives pay- 
ment of the price ; he everywhere gives credit to the 
capitalist. That this credit is no mere fiction, is shown not 
only by the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the 
capitalist, 2 but also by a series of more enduring conse- 
quences. 8 Nevertheless, whether money serves as a means of 

1 " All labour is paid after it has ceased." (" An Inquiry into those Principles re- 
specting the Nature of Demand," &c, p. 104.) " Le credit commercial a du commencer 
an moment on l'ouvrier, premier artisan de la production, a pa, au moyen <!• 
eoonomies, attendre le salaire de son travail jusqu, a la fin de la s< limine, de la 
qninzaine, du mois, du trimestre, &c. (Oh. Ganilh : " Des Cysteines de l'Econ. l'olit." 

edit. Pari*, 1821, t. I. p. 150.) 

2 " L'ouvrier prete son Industrie," but adds Storch slyly : he " risks nothing " ex- 
c|>t " ii<- perdre sun salaire .... l'ouvrier no tranamet rieo de materiel." 

rch: " Cours d'Econ. Polit. Boon." Petersbourg, L815, t. tL, p., 87.) 

One I sample, tn London there are two sorts of bakers, the " full priced," who 

•el] bread ;it its full value, and the " undersellers," who sell it under its value. The 

I class comprises more than three-fourths of the total numbec <>f bakers, (p. 

in the Report of H. s. Tremenhe* re, oommiatioi ei to examine into " the grier- 

iplained of by the journeymen bakers," <fcc, Lond. 1 962. | The and 

■ t without exception, sell bread adulterated with alum, snap, pearl ashea, shalk, 

e stone dust, and such like agreeable nourishing and wholesome mgredianta. 

i hlu' I k, as also the report of " the oommittee of L866 on the 

adulteration of head, "and l)r Hassall's "Adulterations detected," 2nd Kd. Loud. 

Sir John Oordon stated before the imittee of L855, that "in oonsequi 

of these adulterations, the i r man, who lives on two pounds of broad I day, 

""t now get on< fourth pari of nourishing matter, lai alone the daleterioni effeotsoa 
Ins health.* 1 Tremenhi i (1. c. p. xlviii), as the r paeon . why i r< q I u 

<-f the working class, although well a war* of this adnlitration, ntvortheleea a< 

the alum, itone dust, «v.c, us part Of tlnir pui • i.it it is foi them " a matter of 

iity to tak.- from theii baker oi from the ohandler 1 ! ihop, anoh br td I they 

i supply. " As they are not paid their wages before the end of the ■ 
In th ii turn are unable " to pay for the bread ooosnnsad by theii I dur« 

ir 'K the w. . k, before tl"- end Of tbl WK ■ > . Slid I n inenheere adds on the i- viib 11 

aitneotsn, "it ions that bread eon I those mixtu 



154 Capitalist Production. 

purchase or as a means of payment, this makes no alteration in 
the nature of the exchange of commodities. The price of the 
labour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not 
realised till later, like the rent of a house. The labour-power ii 
sold, although it is only paid for at a later period. It will, 
therefore, be useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation 
of the parties, to assume provisionally, that the possessor of 
labour-power, on the occasion of each sale, immediately re- 
ceives the price stipulated to be paid for it. 

We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the 
possessor of this peculiar commodity, labour-power, is de- 
termined. The use-value which the former gets in exchange, 
manifests itself only in the actual usufruct, in the consump- 
tion of the labour-power. The money owner buys every- 
thing necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in the 
market, and pays for it at its full value. The consumption of 
labour-power is at one and the same time the production of 
commodities and of surplus value. The consumption of labour- 
power is completed, as in the case of every other commodity, 
outside the limits of the market or of the sphere of circulation. 
Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and by the possessor of labour- 
power, we therefore take leave for a time of this noisy sphere 
where everything takes place on the surface and in view of all 
men, and follow them both into the hidden abode of production 

for sale in this manner." In many English and still more Scotch agricultural dis 
tricts, wages are paid fortnightly and even monthly ; with such long intervals betweer 
the payments, the agricultural labourer is obliged to buy on credit. . . . H< 
must pay higher prices, and is in fact tied to the shop which gives him credit. Thus 
at Horningham in Wilts, for example, where the wages are monthly, the same flour 
that he could buy elsewhere at Is lOd per stone, costs him 2s 4d per stone. (" Sixtl 
Report" on "Public Health" by "The Medical Officer of the Frivy Council 
&c, 1864." p. 2(>4.) " The block printers of Paisley and Kilmarnock enforced, b] 
a strike, fortnightly, instead of monthly payment of wages." ("Reports of the In 
spectors of Factories for 31st Oct., 1853," p. 34). As a further pretty result of th( 
credit given by the workmen to the capitalist, we may refer to the method current ii 
many English coal mines, where the labourer is not paid till the end of the month 
and in the meantime, receives sums on account from the capitalist, often in goods for 
which the miner is obliged to pay more than the market price (Truck-system.) " It ia 
a common practice with the coal masters to pay once a month, and advance cash to 
their workmen at the end of each intermediate week. The cash is given in the shop" 
(i.e. , the Tommy shop which belongs to the master) ; "the men take it on one side 
and lay it out on the other." ("Children's Employment Commission, III. Report," 
Loud. 18G4, p. 38, n. L92.) 



The Buying and Selling of Labour- Power. 155 

on whose threshold there stares us in the face " No admittance 
except on business." Here we shall see, not only how capital 
produces, but how capital is produced. We shall at last force 
the secret of profit making. 

This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries 
the sale and purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very 
Eden of the innate rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, 
Equality, Property and Bentham. Freedom, because both buyer 
and seller of a commodity, say of labour-power, are constrained 
only by their own free will. They contract as free agents, and 
the agreement they come to, is but the form in which they give 
legal expression to their common will. Equality, because each 
• liters into relation with the other, as with a simple owner of 
commodities, and they exchange equivalent for equivalent. 
Property, because each disposes only of what is his own. And 
Bentham, because each looks only to himself. The only force 
that brings them together and puts them in relation with each 
other, is the selfishness, the gain and the private interests of 
each. Each looks to himself only, and no one troubles himself 
about the rest, and just because they do so, do they all, in 
accordance with the pre-established harmony of things, or 
under the auspices of an all-shrewd providence, work together 
to their mutual advantage, for the common weal and in the 
interest of all. 

On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange 
of commodities, which furnishes the "Free-trader Vulgaris" 
with his views and ideas, and with the standard by which he 

judges a society based on capita] and wages, we think we can 
perceive a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis persona 

He, who before was tie- money owner, now strides in front U 

capitalist ; the po r of labour-power follows as his labourer. 

The one with an air of importance, Bmirking, intent on busim 
the other, timid and holding hack, [ike one who is bringing his 

own hide to market and has nothing to expert but — a hiding 



PART III. 

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS- 
VALUE. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE LABOUR-PROCESS AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING SUR- 
PLUS-VALUE. 

SECTION 1. — THE LABOUR-PROCESS OR THE PRODUCTION OF USE- VALUES. 

The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour- 
power in use is labour itself. The purchaser of labour-power con- 
sumes it by setting the seller of it to work. By working, the 
latter becomes actually, what before he only was potentially, 
labour-power in action, a labourer. In order that his labour may 
reappear in a commodity, he must, before all things, expend it 
on something useful, on something capable of satisfying a 
want of some sort. Hence, what the capitalist sets the lab- 
ourer to produce, is a particular use-value, a specified article. 
The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is carried 
on under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does not 
alter the general character of that production. We shall, 
therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-procesfl 
independently of the particular form it assumes under given 
social conditions. 

Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man 
and Nature participate, and in which man of his own accord 
starts, regulates, and controls the material re-actions between 
himself and Nature. He opposes himself to Nature as one of 
her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and 



The Labour Process. 157 

hands, the natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate 
Nature's productions in a form adapted to his own wants. By 
thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the 
same time changes his own nature. He develops his slumber- 
ing powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway. 
We are not now dealing with those primitive instinctive forms 
of labour that remind us of the mere animal. An immeasur- 
able interval of time separates the state of things in which a 
man brings his labour-power to market for sale as a commodity, 
from that state in which human labour was still in its first in- 
stinctive stage. We presuppose labour in a form that stamps 
it as exclusively human. A spider conducts operations that 
resemble those of a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an 
architect in the construction of her cells. But what distin- 
guishes the worst architect from the best of bees is this, that 
the architect raises his structure in imagination before he erects 
it in reality. At the end of every labour-process, we get a re- 
sult that already existed in the imagination of the labourer at 
its commencement. He not only effects a change of form in 
the material on which he works, but he also realises a purpose 
of his own that gives the law to his modus operandi, and to 
which he must subordinate his will. And this subordination 
is no mere momentary act. Besides the exertion of the bodily 
organs, the process demands that, during the whole operation, 
the workman's will be steadily in consonance with his purpi 
This means close attention. The less he is attracted by the 
nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, 
an«l the less, therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives 
play to his bodily and mental powers, the more close his atten- 
1 is forced to be. 

The elementary factors of the labour-process are l,the personal 
activity of man, /'.<., work itself, 2, the subject of thai work, 
and 3, its instrument b, 

The ^oil (and thi>, economically Bpeaking, includes water] in 
the virgin state in which it supplies 1 man with w or 

1 "Tin- earth '1 ipontaneoui productions being la ^m.ill quantity, and quite lnd< , 
• 1'iit of man, appear, ai < f in re, to be farniohed by \ ktura, in the lame p ij » s <* email 
sum is given to v young man, la ordei to put him m 1 way of Industry, and of mak 
I Ls fortune." (Jamce Stcuart: "rrtuoiplei of Poiil 1 lit. I >ui»lm, i. 

.. 1. |>. 116). 



1 5S Capitalist Production. 

the means of subsistence ready to hand, exists independently 
of him, and is the universal subject of human labour. All 
those things which labour merely separates from immediate 
connection with their environment, are subjects of labour 
spontaneously provided by Nature. Such are fish which we 
catch and take from their element, water, timber which we 
fell in the virgin forest, and ores which we extract from their 
veins. If, on the other hand, the subject of labour has, so to 
say, been filtered through previous labour, we call it raw 
material ; such is ore already extracted and ready for wash- 
ing. All raw material is the subject of labour, but not every 
subject of labour is raw material ; it can only become so, after 
it has undergone some alteration bv means of labour. 

An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, 
which the labourer interposes between himself and the subject 
of his labour, and which serves as the conductor of his activity. 
He makes use of the mechanical, physical, and chemical pro- 
perties of some substances in order to make other substances 
subservient to his aims. 1 Leaving out of consideration such 
ready-made means of subsistence as fruits, in gathering which 
a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his labour, the 
first thing of which the labourer possesses himself is not the 
subject of labour but its instrument. Thus Nature becomes one 
of the organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own 
bodily organs, adding stature to himself in spite of the Bible. 
As the earth is his original larder, so too it is his original tool 
house. It supplies him, for instance, with stones for throwing, 
grinding, pressing, cutting, &c. The earth itself is an instru- 
ment of labour, but when used as such in agriculture implies a 
whole series of other instruments and a comparatively high 
development of labour. 2 No sooner does labour undergo the 

1 "Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. Her cunning consists principally in 
her mediating activity, which, by causing objects to act and re-act on each other in 
accordance with their own nature, in this way, without any direct interference in the 
process, carries out reason's intentions." (Hegel: " Encyklopiidie, Erster Theil. Die 
Logik." Berlin, 1840, p. 382.) 

2 In his otherwise miserable work, (" Theorie de l'Econ. Folit." Paris, 1819), 
Ganilh enumerates in a striking manner in opposition to the " Physiocrats " the long 
m tics of previous processes necessary before agriculture properly so called can com- 
mence. 



The Labour Process. 159 

least development, than it requires specially prepared instru- 
ments. Thus in the oldest caves we find stone implements and 
weapons. In the earliest period of human history domesticated 
animals, i.e., animals which have been bred for the purpose, and 
have undergone modifications by means of labour, play the 
chief part as instruments of labour along with specially pre- 
pared stones, wood, bones, and shells. 1 The use and fabrication 
of instruments of labour, although existing in the germ among 
certain species of animals, is specifically characteristic of the 
human labour-process, and Franklin therefore defines man as a 
tool-making animal. Relics of by-gone instruments of labour 
possess the same importance for the investigation of extinct 
economical forms of society, as do fossil bones for the determina- 
tion of extinct species of animals. It is not the articles made, 
but how they are made, and by what instruments, that enables 
us to distinguish different economical epochs. 2 Instruments of 
labour not only supply a standard of the degree of develop- 
ment to which human labour has attained, but they are also 
indicators of the social conditions under which that labour is 
carried on. Among the instruments of labour, those of a 
mechanical nature, which, taken as a whole, we may call the 
bone and muscles of production, offer much more decided 
characteristics of a given epoch of production, than those which, 
like pipes, tubs, baskets, jars, &C., serve only to hold the 
materials for labour, which latter class, we may in a general 
way, call the vascular system of production. The latter first 
begins to play an important part in the chemical industries. 

In a \vi<l»r sense we may include among the instruments of 
labour, in addition to those things that are used for directly 
transferring labour to its subject, and which therefore, in one 

'Turcot in hit " l;. iflexiont hut la Formation et la Distribution des Richest 
(1766) brings well into prominence the importance of domesticated animals to curly 
eWUiaation. 

■ The Leati Important oommoditioi of all for the keehnologica] oomparison «>f 
«litr< rent epocbi of production are articles of luxury , in the strict meaning ol the term 
vcr little our written histories up to this time notice the development of mat 

production, Rrhioh is the basis of all Social life, and therefore <>f all real histor) 

prshietorio timet have been til satined in afHTTrrdamrt, vita the results, nol tiled 

rioal, but of materialistic ii tions. Tl ods havs beea divided, to 

pond with the materials from which theii imph m< oti tnd •/< ■ ...ide, 

;ito tin- itone, tl.« bronst, and the iron age*. 



160 Capitalist Production. 

way or another, serve as conductors of activity, all such obj- 
as are necessary for carrying on the labour-process. These do 
not enter directly into the process, but without them it is either 
impossible for it to take place at all, or possible only to a 
partial extent. Once more we find the earth to be a universal 
instrument of this sort, for it furnishes a locus standi to the 
labourer and a field of employment for his activity. Among 
instruments that are the result of previous labour and also 
belong to this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and so 
forth. 

In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help 
of the instruments of labour, effects an alteration, designed from 
the commencement, in the material worked upon. The proc 
disappears in the product ; the latter is a use- value, Nature's 
material adapted by a change of form to the wants of man. 
Labour has incorporated itself with its subject : the former is 
materialised, the latter transformed. That which in the labourer 
appeared as movement, now appears in the product as a fixed 
quality without motion. The blacksmith forges and the pro- 
duct is a forcing. 

If we examine the whole process from the point of view o 
its result, the product, it is plain that both the instruments anc 
the subject of labour, are means of production, 1 and that tin 
labour itself is productive labour. 2 

Though a use-value, in the form of a product, issues from 
the labour-process, yet other use-values, products of previous 
labour, enter into it as means of production. The same use^ 
value is both the product of a previous process, and a means o 
production in a later process. Products are therefore not only 
results, but also essential conditions of labour. 

With the exception of the extractive industries, in whicli 
the material for labour is provided immediately by nature 
such as mining, hunting, fishing, and agriculture (so far as tin 

1 It appears paradoxical to assert, that uncaught fish, for instance, are a means of 
production in the fishing industry. But hitherto no one has discovered the art ol 
catching fish in waters that contain none. 

2 This method of determining from the standpoint of the labour-process alone, wi 
is productive labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capita 
process of uroduction. 



The Labour Process. i6r 

latter is confined to breaking up virgin soil), all branches of 
industry manipulate raw material, objects already filtered 
through labour, already products of labour. Such is seed in 
agriculture. Animals and plants, which we are accustomed to 
consider as products of nature, are in their present form, not 
only products of, say last year's labour, but the result of a 
gradual transformation, continued through many generations, 
under man's superintendence, and by means of his labour. 
But in the great majority of cases, instruments of labour show 
even to the most superficial observer, traces of the labour of 
past ages. 

Raw material may either form the principal substance of a 
product, or it may enter into its formation only as an acces- 
sory. An accessory may be consumed by the instruments of 
labour, as coal under a boiler, oil by a wheel, hay by draft- 
horses, or it may be mixed with the raw material in order to 
produce some modification thereof, as chlorine into unbleached 
linen, coal with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again, it may help 
to <arry on the work itself, as in the case of the materials used 
for heating and lighting workshops. The distinction between 
principal substance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical 
industries, because there none of the raw material reappears, in 
its original composition, in the substance of the product. 1 

Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable 
of being applied to different uses. One and the same product 
may therefore serve as raw material in very different processes. 
Corn, for example, is a raw material for millers, stareh-manu- 
facturers, distillers, and cattle-breeders. It also enters as raw 
material into its own production in the shape of seed: coal, too, 
is at the same time the product of, and a means of production 
in, coal mining. 

Again, a particular product may be used in one and the sain-' 
process, both as an instrument of labour and as raw material. 
take, lor instance, tie- fattening of cattle, where the animal is 
the raw material, and at the same time' an instrument for the 

production of manure. 

• Btoroh oalli true raw materiali " matidrta," and 

< 'herbuliez JeicribcH uccrHHor.cM ,im " main. , m*ti uiutnLiliu." ' 

L 



1 62 Capitalist Pi-odtiction. 

A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may- 
yet serve as raw material for a further product, as grapes when 
they become the raw material for wine. On the other hand, 
labour may give us its product in such a form, that we can use 
it only as raw material, as is the case with cotton, thread, and 
yarn. Such a raw material, though itself a product, may have 
to go through a whole series of different processes : in each of 
these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as raw 
material, until the last process of the series leaves it a perfect 
product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an in- 
strument of labour. 

Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as 
raw material, as instrument of labour, or as product, this is deter- 
mined entirely by its function in the labour process, by the 
position it there occupies : as this varies, so does its character. 

Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of produc- 
tion into a new labour-process, it thereby loses its character of 
product, and becomes a mere factor in the process. A spinner 
treats spindles only as implements for spinning, and flax only 
as the material that he spins. Of course it is impossible to spin 
without material and spindles ; and therefore the [existence of 
these things as products, at the commencement of the spinning 
operation, must be presumed : but in the process itself, the fact 
that they are products of previous labour, is a matter of utter 
indifference ; just as in the digestive process, it is of no impor- 
tance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous 
labour of the farmer, the miller, and the baker. On the con- 
trary, it is generally by their imperfections as products, that 
the means of production in any process assert themselves in 
their character of products. A blunt knife or weak thread 
forcibly remind us of Mr. A., the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. 
In the finished product the labour by means of which it has 
acquired its useful qualities is not palpable, has apparently 
vanished. 

A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is 
useless. In addition, it falls a prey to the destructive influence 
of natural forces. Iron rusts and wood rots. Yarn with which 
we neither weave nor knit, is cotton wasted. Living labour 



The Labour Process. 16 



6 



must seize upon these things and rouse them from their death - 
sleep, change them from mere possible use-values into real 
and effective ones. Bathed in the fire of labour, appropriated 
as part and parcel of labour's organism, and, as it were, made 
alive for the performance of their functions in the process, they 
are in truth consumed, but * consumed with a purpose, as 
elementary constituents of new use-values, of new products, 
ever ready as means of subsistence for individual consumption, 
or as means of production for some new labour-process. 

If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only 
results, but also necessary conditions, of the labour-process, on 
the other hand, their assumption into that process, their contact 
with living labour, is the sole means by which they can be 
made to retain their character of use-values, and be utilised. 

Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its 
instruments, consumes them, and is therefore a process of con- 
sumption. Such productive consumption is distinguished 
from individual consumption by this, that the latter uses up 
products, as means of subsistence for the living individual; the 
former, as means whereby alone, labour, the labour-power of 
the living individual, is enabled to act. The product, therefore, 
of individual consumption, is the consumer himself ; the result 
of productive consumption, is a product distinct from the con- 
sumer. 

In so far then, as its instruments and subjects arc themseh » a 
products, labour consumes products in order to create products, 
or in other words, consumes one set of products by turning 
them into means of production for another set. But, just as in 
tin' beginning, the only participators in the labour-process 
wnv man and the earth, which Litter exists independently of 
man, so even now we still employ in the process many means 
of product ion, provided directly by oat are, that do not h present 
any combination of natural substances with human labour. 

The labour process, resolved as above into its simple 

elementary factors, is human action with a view to the pro- 
duction of use- values, appropriation of natural substances to 
human requirements; it is the necessary condition i"i effecting 
exchange of matter between man and Nature; it is the evei 



164 Capitalist Production. 

lasting n at 11 re -imposed condition of human existence, and 
therefore is independent of every social phase of that existence, 
or rather, is common to every such phase. It was, therefore. 
not necessary to represent our labourer in connexion with 
other labourers ; man and his labour on one side, Nature and 
its materials on the other, sufficed. As the taste of the porridge 
does not tell you who grew the oats, no more does this simple 
process tell you of itself what are the social conditions under 
which it is taking place, whether under the slave-owner's 
brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the capitalist, whether 
Cincinnatus carries it on in tilling his modest farm or a savage 
in killing wild animals with stones. 1 

Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. We left him 
just after he had purchased, in the open market, all the necessary 
factors of the labour-process; its objective factors, the means of 
production, as well as its subjective factor, labour-power. 
With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of 
production and the kind of labour-power best adapted to his 
particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking, or any other kind. 
He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the labour-power 
that he has just bought, by causing the labourer, the impersona- 
tion of that labour-power, to consume the means of production 
by his labour. The general character of the labour-process is 
evidently not changed by the fact, that the labourer works for 
the capitalist instead of for himself ; moreover, the particular 
methods and operations employed in bootmaking or spinning 
are not immediately changed by the intervention of the 
capitalist. He must begin by taking the labour-power as he 
finds it in the market, and consequently be satisfied with 
labour of such a kind as would be found in the period 
immediately preceding the rise of capitalists. Changes in the 
methods of production by the subordination of labour to 
capital, can take place only at a later period, and therefore 
will have to be treated of in a later chapter. 

1 liy a wonderful feat of logical acumen, Colonel Tovrens has discovered, in this 
stone of the savage the origin of capital. " In the first stone which he [the savage) 
dings at the wild animal he pursues, in the first stick that he seizes to strike down 
the fruit which hangs above his reach, we see the appropriation of one article for the 
purpose of aiding in the Requisition of another, and thus discover the origin of 
capital. (II. Torrens : " An Essay on the Production of Wealth," &c, pp. 70-71.) 



The Labour Process, 165 

The labour-process, turned into the process by which the 
capitalist consumes labour-power, exhibits two characteristic 
phenomena. First, the labourer works under the control of 
the capitalist to whom his labour belongs ; the capitalist taking 
good care that the work is done in a proper manner, and that 
the means of production are used with intelligence, so that 
there is no unnecessary waste of raw material, and no wear and 
tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily caused by 
the work. 

Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and 
not that of the labourer, its immediate producer. Suppose 
that a capitalist pays for a day's labour-power at its value ; 
then the right to use that power for a day belongs to him, just 
as much as the right to use any other commodity, such as a 
horse that he has hired for the day. To the purchaser of a 
commodity belongs its use, and the seller of labour-power, by 
giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part with the 
use-value that he has sold. From the instant he steps into 
the workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore 
also its use, which is labour, belongs to the capitalist. By the 
purchase of labour-power, the capitalist incorporates labour, as 
a living ferment, with the lifeless constituents of the product. 
From his point of view, the labour-process is nothing more 
than the consumption of the commodity purchased, i.e., of 
labour-power; bub this consumption cannot be effected except 
by supplying the labour-power with the means of production. 
The labour-process is a process between things that the capital- 
ist has purchased, things that have become his property. The 
product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much 
as does the wine which is the product of a process of fermenta- 
tion completed in his cellar. 1 

1 M Products are appropriated before they arc converted into capital ; this convei 
sion docs not secure them from noil appropriation." (( 'herhulie/. : " Kicln OH Pau\ i- . 
• <lit Pari*, 1S11, pp. .">:;, 54.) "The Proletarian, by Belling his labour foi a definite 
quantity of the nee.^sai ieK of life, renounces all claim to a share in the pioduct. 
The mode of appropriation of the products remains the same as befoi I ; it bin no 
way alt« red by the bargain we have mentioned. The product holongl I \' ItUUVelj to 

ipitalilt, who Supplied the raw materia] and the nee. ss.uien of life ; and tfa 
a rigOrOUS OOntequenOfl of the law of appropriation a law whose fundamental I'm 
tiple was the very opposite, namely, that every labourer has an c\clu-i\e right to 



1 66 Capitalist Production. 



SECTION 2. — THE PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE. 

The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as 
yarn, for example, or boots. But, although boots are, in one 
sense, the basis of all social progress, and our capitalist is a 
decided " progressist," yet he does not manufacture boots for 
their own sake. Use-value is, by no means, the thing " qu'on 
aime pour lui-meme " in the production of commodities. Use- 
values are only produced by capitalists, because, and in so far 
as, they arc the material substratum, the depositaries of 
exchange-value. Our capitalist has two objects in view : in 
the first place, he wants to produce a use-value that has a 
value in exchange, that is to say, an article destined to be sold, 
a commodity ; and secondly, he desires to produce a commodity 
whose value shall be greater than the sum of the values of the 
commodities used in its production, that is, of the means of 
production and the labour-power, that he purchased with his 
good money in the open market. His aim is to produce not 
only a use-value, but a commodity also; not only use- value, 
but value ; not only value, but at the same time surplus- 
value. 

It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the 
production of commodities, and that, up to this point, we have 
only considered one aspect of the process. Just as commodities 
are, at the same time, use-values and values, so the process of 
producing them must be a labour-process, and at the same 
time, a process of creating value. 1 

Let us now examine production as a creation of value. 

We know that the value of each commodity is determined 
by the quantity of labour expended on and materialised in it, 

the ownership of what he produces." (1. c. p. 58.) " When the labourers receive 
wages for their labour .... the capitalist is then the owner not of the capital only" 
(he means the means of production) " but of the labour also. If what is paid as wages 
is included, as it commonly is, in the term capital, it is absurd to talk of labour 
separately from capital. The word capital as thus employed includes labour and 
capital both." (James Mill : " Elements of Pol. Econ.," &c, Ed. 1821, pp. 70, 71.) 

1 As has been stated in a previous note, the English language has two different 
expressions for these two different aspects of labour : in the Simple Labour-process, 
the process of producing Use-Values, it is Work ; in the process of creation of Value, 
it is Labour, taking the term in its strictly economical sense.— Ed. 



The Labour Process. 167 

by the working-time necessary, under given social conditions, 
for its production. This rule also holds good in the case of 
the product that accrued to our capitalist, as the result of the 
labour-process carried on for him. Assuming this product to 
be 10 lbs. of yarn, our first step is to calculate the quantity of 
labour realised in it. 

For spinning the yarn, raw material is required ; suppose in 
this case 10 lbs. of cotton. We have no need at present to 
investigate the value of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we 
will assume, bought it at its full value, say of ten shillings. 
In this price the labour required for the production of the 
cotton is already expressed in terms of the average labour of 
society. We will further assume £hat the wear and tear of the 
spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all other 
instruments of labour emplo3 7 ed, amounts to the value of 2s. 
If, then, twenty-four hours' labour, or two working days, are 
required to produce the quantity of gold represented by twelve 
shillings, we have here, to begin with, two days' labour already 
incorporated in the yarn. 

We must not let ourselv3S be misled by the circumstance 
that the cotton has taken a new shape while the substance of 
the spindle has to a certain extent been used up. By the 
general law of value, if the value of 40 lbs. of yarn = the value 
of 40 lbs. of cotton + the value of a whole spindle, i.e., if the 
same working time is required to produce the commodities on 
either side of this equation, then 10 lbs. of yarn are an 
6 1'iivalent for 10 lbs. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a 
spindle. In the case we are considering the same working 
time is materialised in the 10 lbs. of yarn on the one hand, 
and in the 10 lbs. of cotton and the fraction of a spindle 
on the other. Therefore, whether value appears in cotton, in 
pindle, or in yarn, makes no difference in the amount of 
that value Tie- spindle and cotton, instead of resting quietly 
side by Bide, join together in the process, their forms are 

altered, and (hey are turned into yarn ; but their value is 

no more affected by this fact than it would be if they had b an 
simply exchanged for their equivalent in yarn. 
The labour required for the production <»t' the cotton, the 



1 68 Capitalist Production. 

raw material of the yarn, is part of the labour necessary to 
produce the yarn, and is therefore contained in the yarn. The 
same applies to the labour embodied in the spindle, without 
whose wear and tear the cotton could not be spun. 

Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour- 
lime required for its production, all the special processes 
carried on at various times and in different places, which were 
necessary, first to produce the cotton and the wasted portion of 
the spindle, and then with the cotton and spindle to spin the 
yarn, may together be looked on as different and successive 
phases of one and the same process. The whole of the labour 
in the yarn is past labour ; and it is a matter of no importance 
that the operations necessary for the production of its con- 
stituent elements were carried on at times which, referred to 
the present, are more remote than the final operation of 
spinning. If a definite quantity of labour, say thirty days, 
is requisite to build a house, the total amount of labour incor- 
porated in it is not altered by the fact that the work of the 
last day is done twenty-nine days later than that of the first. 
Therefore the labour contained in the raw material and the 
instruments of labour can be treated just as if it were labour 
expended in an earlier stage of the spinning process, before the 
labour of actual spinning commenced. 

The values of the means of production, i.e., the cotton and the 
spindle, which values are expressed in the price of twelve 
shillings, are therefore constituent parts of the value of the 
yarn, or, in other words, of the value of the product. 

Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. First, the 
cotton and spindle must concur in the production of a use- 
value ; they must in the present case become yarn. Value is 
independent of the particular use-value by which it is borne, but 
it must be embodied in a use-value of some kind. Secondly, 
the time occupied in the labour of production must not exceed 
the time really necessary under the given social conditions of 
the case. Therefore, if no more than 1 lb. of cotton be requisite 
to spin 1 lb. of yarn, care must be taken that no more than 
this weight of cotton is consumed in the production of 1 lb. of 
yarn ; and similarly with regard to the spindle. Though the 



The Labour Process. 169 

capitalist have a hobby, and use a gold instead of a steel 
spindle, yet the only labour that counts for anything in the 
value of the yarn is that which would be required to produce 
a steel spindle, because no more is necessary under the given 
social conditions. 

We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is ow- 
ing to the cotton and the spindle. It amounts to twelve 
shillings or the value of two days' work. The next point for 
our consideration is, what portion of the value of the yarn is 
added to the cotton by the labour of the spinner. 

We have now to consider this labour under a very different 
aspect from that which it had during the labour-process; there, 
we viewed it solely as that particular kind of human activity 
which changes cotton into yarn ; there, the more the labour 
was suited to the work, the better the yarn, other circumstances 
remaining the same. The labour of the spinner was then 
viewed as specifically different from other kinds of productive 
labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz., spinning, 
different, on the other hand, in the special character of its 
operations, in the special nature of its means of production and 
in the special use-value of its product. For the operation of 
spinning, cotton and spindles are a necessity, but for making 
1 ifled cannon they would be of no use whatever. Here, on the 
contrary, where we consider the labour of the spinner only so 
far as it is value-creating, i.e., a source of value, his labour differs 
ID DO respect from the labour of the man who bores cannon, or 
'what here more nearly concerns us), from the labour of the 
cotton-planter and spindle-maker Incorporated in the means of 
production. It is solely by reason of this identity, that cotton 
planting, spindle making and spinning, are capable of forming 
the component parts, differing only quantitatively from each 
other, of one whole, namely, the value of the yarn. Here, we 
have nothing more to do with the quality, the nature and the 
specific character of the labour, but merely with its quantity. 
And this simply requires to be calculated We proceed upon 
the assumption that spinning is simple, unskilled labour, the 
age labour of a given state of society. Hereafter w.' shall 

thai the contrary assumption would make do differen 



170 Capitalist Production. 

While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly under- 
goes a transformation : from being motion, it becomes an object 
without motion ; from being the labourer working, it becomes 
the thing produced. At the end of one hour's spinning, that 
act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn ; in other 
words, a definite quantity of labour, namely that of one hour, 
has become embodied in the cotton. We say labour, i.e., the ex- 
penditure of his vital force by the spinner, and not spinning 
labour, because the special work of spinning counts here, only 
so far as it is the expenditure of labour-poWer in general, and 
not in so far as it is the specific work of the spinner. 

In the process we are now considering it is of extreme im- 
portance, that no more time be consumed in the work of trans- 
forming the cotton into yarn than is necessary under the given 
social conditions. If under normal, i.e., average social condi- 
tions of production, a pounds of cotton ought to be made into 
b pounds of yarn by one hour's labour, then a day's labour 
does not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 a pounds of cotton 
have been made into 12 6 pounds of yarn ; for in the creation 
of value, the time that is socially necessary alone counts. 

Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the pro- 
duct now appear in quite a new light, very different from that 
in which we viewed them in the labour-process pure and 
simple. The raw material serves now merely as an absorbent 
of a definite quantity of labour. By this absorption it is in 
i'act changed into yarn, because it is spun, because labour-powei 
in the form of spinning is added to it ; but the product, tin 
yarn, is now nothing more than a measure of the labour 
absorbed by the cotton. If in one hour If lbs. of cotton can be 
spun into 1| lbs. of yarn, then 10 lbs. of yarn indicate the 
absorption of 6 hours' labour. Definite quantities of product, 
these quantities being determined by experience, now represent 
nothing but definite quantities of labour, definite masses of 
crystallized labour-time. They are nothing more than the 
materialisation of so many hours or so many days of social 
labour. 

We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the 
labour is the specific work of spinning, that its subject is cotton 



The Labour Process. 1 7 r 

and its product yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject 
itself is already a product and therefore raw material. If the 
spinner, instead of spinning, were working in a coal mine, the 
subject of his labour, the coal, would be supplied by Nature ; 
nevertheless, a definite quantity of extracted coal, a hundred 
weight for example, would represent a definite quantity of 
absorbed labour. 

We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of 
a day's labour-power is three shillings, and that six hours' 
labour are incorporated in that sum ; and consequently that this 
amount of labour is requisite to produce the necessaries of life 
daily required on an average by the labourer. If now our 
-pinner by working for one hour, can convert 1§ lbs. of cotton 
into 1? lbs. of yarn, 1 it follows that in six hours he will convert 
10 lbs. of cotton into 10 lbs. of yarn. Hence, during the spinn- 
ing process, the cotton absorbs six hours' labour. The same 
quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold of the 
value of three shillings. Consequently by the mere labour of 
spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the cotton. 

Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 
lbs. of yarn. Two and a half days' labour have been embodied 
in it, of which two days were contained in the cotton and in 
the substance of the spindle worn away, and half a day was 
abs >rbed during the process of spinning. This two and a half 
days' labour is also represented by a piece of gold of the value 
of fifteen shillings. Hence, fifteen shillings is an adequate price 
for the 10 lbs. of yarn, or the price of one pound is eighteen- 
pence. 

Our capitalist stares in astonishment The value of the pro- 
duct tly 1 |ual to the value of the capital advanced. The 
value so advanced has not expanded, no surplus-value has been 
created, and consequently money has not been converted in! 1 
capital The price of the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen 
shillings were spent in the open market upon the constituent 
elements of the product, or, what amounts to the same thi 
upon the factors of the labour-process; ten shillings were paid 
lor the cotton, two shillings for the substance of the Bpindle 



17 2 Capitalist Production. 

worn away, and three shillings for the labour-]' >wer. The 
swollen value of the yarn is of no avail, for it is merely the 
sum of the values formerly existing in the eotton, the spindle, 
and the labour-power : out of such a simple addition of existing 
values, no surplus-value can possibly arise. 1 These separate 
values are now all concentrated in one thing ; but so they were 
also in the sum of fifteen shillings, before it was split up into 
three parts, by the purchase of the commodities. 

There is in reality nothing very strange in this result The 
value of one pound of yarn being eighteenpence, if our capitalist 
buys 10 lbs. of yarn in the market, he must pay filteen shillings 
for them. It is clear that, whether a man buys his house ready 
built, or gets it built for him, in neither case will the mode of 
acquisition increase the amount of money laid out on the 
house. 

Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, 
exclaims: "Oh! but I advanced my money for the express 
purpose of making more money." The way to Hell is paved 
with good intentions, and he might just as easily have intended 
to make money, without producing at all. " He threatens all 
sorts of things. He won't be caught napping again. In 
future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of 
manufacturing them himself. But if all his brother capitalists 
were to do the same, where would he find his commodities in 
the market ? And his money he cannot eat. He tries persua- 
sion. " Consider my abstinence; I might have played ducks 
and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead of that I con- 
sumed it productively, and made yarn with it." Very well, 

1 This is the fundamental proposition on which is based the doctrine of the 
Physiocrat! as to the unproductiveness of all labour that is not agriculture: it is 
irrefutable for the orthodox economist. "Cette facon d'imputcr a unc seule chose 
la valeur de plusieurs autres " (par exemple au lin la consommation du tisserand), 
"d'appliquer, pour ainsi dire, couche sur couche, plusieurs valeurs sur une seule, fait 
que celle-ci grossit d'autant . . . . Le terme d'addition point tres-bien la 
maniere dont se forme le prix des ouvrages de main-d'ceuvre; ce prix n'est qu'un total 
de plusieurs valours consommees et ad<litionn6es ensemble; or, additionner n'est pas 
multiplier." (" Mercier de la Riviere," 1. c, p. r>'.)9.) 

2 Thus from 1811-47 he withdrew part of his capital from productive employment, 
in order to throw it away in railway speculations ; and so also, during the American 
Civil War, he closed his factory, and turned his work-people, i*.to the streets, in order 
to gamble on the Liverpool cotton exchange. 



The Labour Process. 173 

and by way of reward he is now in possession of good yarn 
instead of a bad conscience ; and as for playing the part of a 
miser, it would never do for him to relapse into such bad ways 
as that ; we liave seen before to what results such asceticism 
leads. Besides, where nothing is, the king has lost his rights ; 
whatever may be the merit of his abstinence, there is nothing 
wherewith specially to remunerate it, because the value of the 
product is merely the sum of the values of the commodities 
that were thrown into the process of production. Let him 
therefore console himself with the reflection that virtue is its 
own reward. But no, he becomes importunate. He says: 
" The yarn is of no use to me : I produced it for sale." In that 
C&B6 let him sell it, or, still better, let him for the future produce 
only things for satisfying his personal wants, a remedy that his 
physician M'( 'ulloeli has already prescribed as infallible against 
an epidemic of over-production. He now gets obstinate. 
"Can the labourer," he asks, "merely with his arms and legs, 
produce commodities out of nothing? Did I not supply him 
with the materials, by means of which, and in which alone, his 
labour could be embodied ? And as the greater part of society 
ists of such ne'er-do-weels, have I not rendered society 
incalculable service by my instruments of production, my cotton 
and my spindle, and not only society, but the labourer also, 
whom in addition 1 have provided with the necessaries of life I 
And am I to be allowed nothing in return for all this service?" 
Well, but has not the labourer rendered him the equivalent 
lervice of changing his cotton and spindle into yarn? More 
over, there Is here no question of service. ' A service is nothing 
more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, 

1 *' Extol thyself, put on fin.i v ;n i • I ailorn thyself . . . hut whoever takes more 
or bettei 1 1 1. 'in hi jW< I, that is usury, ami in not serviee, hut Wrong done to Ins i ■ 

as when 006 ■teall ami i »hs. All is not service ami hem tit to ■ QfljfhboOI that 
ad 1" m tit. Kor an adulterer ami adult- 1. t >\<< one another gnat 

■ and !■'• 1 ire. A horseman do* I an Inoendiarj • -^i • a1 a nri< • . by helping him 
•fa on the highway, and pillage land and honaee. The papisti do ours a great 

Q that they dont <lto\vu, hum, munhr all of them, Of let th.m all ml hi 
n; but let .some !. ,,uly <lnve them out, M take from them ^ 

The deril himself doi i Msaanraati IneatimaMt tarrku . . Tomb up, 

im full of groat, e\e. 11, i,t, ami daflj and hem tit." (Martin Lathe* 1 

Vn mi, wider den Washer su predigon, Wittenberg, 1640.) 



i 74 Capitalist Production. 

or be it of labour^ But here we are dealing with exchai 
value. The capitalist paid to the labourer a value of 3 shillings, 
and the labourer gave him back an exact equivalent in the value 
of 3 shillings, added by him to the cotton : he gave him value 
for value. Our friend, up to this time so purse-proud, suddenly 
assumes the modest demeanour of his own workman, and 
exclaims : " Have I myself not worked ? Have I not "performed 
the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spinner ? 
And does not this labour, too, create value?" His overlooker 
and his manager try to hide their smiles. Meanwhile, after a 
hearty laugh, he re-assumes his usual mien. Though he 
chanted to us the whole creed of the economists, in reality, he 
says, he would not give a brass farthing for it. He leaves this 
and all such like subterfuges and iu ogling tricks to the 

O J Do O 

professors of political economy, who are paid for it. He him- 
self is a practical man ; and though he does not always consider 
what he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows 
what he is about. 

Let us examine the matter more closely. The value of a 
day's labour-power amounts to 3 shillings, because on our 
assumption half a day's labour is embodied in that quantity oi 
labour-power, i.e., because the means of subsistence that are daily 
required for the production of labour-power, cost half a day's 
labour. But the past labour that is embodied in the labour- 
power, and the living labour that it can call into action ; the 
daily cost of maintaining it, and its daily expenditure in work, 
are two totally different things. The former determines the 
exchange- value of the labour-power, the latter is its use- value. 
The fact that half a day's labour is necessary to keep the 
labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent 
him from working a whole day. Therefore, the value of labour- 
power, and the value which that labour-power creates in the 
labour process, are two entirely different magnitudes ; and this 
difference of the two values was what the capitalist had in 
view, when he was purchasing the labour-power. The useful 
qualities that labour-power possesses, and by virtue of which it 

1 In " Zur Kritik der Pol. Oek.," p. 14, I make the following remark on this 
point— " It is not difficult to understand what ' service ' the category 4 service ' must 
render to a class of economists like J. V». Say and F. Kastiat." 



The Labour Process. 175 

makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing more than a conditio 
sine qua non ; for in order to create value, labour must be 
expended in a useful manner. What really influenced him was 
the specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being 
a source not only of value, but of more value than it has itst If 
This is the special service that the capitalist expects from 
labour-power, and in this transaction he acts in accordance 
with the " eternal laws " of the exchange of commodities. The 
seller of labour-power, like the seller of any other commodity, 
realises its exchange-value, and parts with its use-value. He 
cannot take the one without giving the other. The use-value 
of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as little 
to its seller, as the use-value of oil after it has been sold belongs 
to the dealer who has sold it. The owner of the money has 
paid the value of a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the 
of it for a day ; a day's labour belongs to him. The cir- 
cumstance, that on the one hand the daily sustenance of labour- 
power costs only half a day's labour, while on the other hand 
tin; very same labour-power can work during a whole day, that 
consequently the value which its use during one day creates, is 
double what he pays lor that use, this circumstance is, without 
doubt, a piece of good luck for the buyer, but by no means an 
injury to the seller. 

Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the 
cause of his laughter. The labourer therefore finds, in the 
workshop, the means of production necessary for working, not 
only during six, but during twelve hours. Just as during the 
.>ix hours' process OUr 1 lbs. of cotton absorbed six hours' labour, 

and became LO lbs. of yarn, so now, 20 lbs. of cotton will absorb 1 2 
hours' labour and be changed into 20 lbs. of yarn. Let us DOM 
mine the product of this prolonged process. There is no* 
materialised in this 20 Iba of yarn tin- labour of five days, of which 
four days are due bo the cotton and the lost Bteel of the spindle, 
tin- remaining day having been absorbed by die cotton during 
the pinning process. Exprc led in gold, tin- labour of five 
thirty shillings. This is therefore the price of the 
20 lbs. of yarn, giving, as before, eighteenpence as the price 1 1 1 
pound l»ut the sum of the values of tbe commodities that 



i 76 Capitalist Production. 

entered into the process amounts to 27 shillings. The value 
of the yarn is 30 shillings. Therefore the value of the product 
is 1 greater than the value advanced for its production ; 27 
shillings have been transformed into 30 shillings ; a surplus- 
value of 3 shillings has been created. The trick has at la±>t 
succeeded ; money has been converted into capital. 

Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws 
that regulate the exchange of commodities, have been in no way 
violated. Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. For 
the capitalist as buyer paid for each commodity, for the cotton, 
the spindle and the labour-power, its full value. He then did 
what is done by every purchaser of commodities; he consumed 
their use-value. The consumption of the labour-power, which 
was also the process of producing commodities, resulted in 20 
lbs. of yarn, having a value of 30 shillings. The capitalist, 
formerly a buyer, now returns to market as a seller, of com- 
modities. He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound, which is 
its exact value. Yet for all that he withdraws S shillings more 
from circulation than he originally threw into it. This 
metamorphosis, this conversion of money into capital, takes 
place both within the sphere of circulation and also outside it ; 
within the circulation, because conditioned by the purchase of 
the labour-power in the market ; outside the circulation, be- 
cause what is done within it is only a stepping-stone to the 
production of surplus-value, a process which is entirely confined 
to the sphere of production. Thus "tout est pour le mieux 
dans le meilleur des mondes possibles." 

By turning his money into commodities that serve as the 
material elements of a new product, and as factors in the labour- 
process, by incorporating living labour with their dead sub- 
stance, the capitalist at the same time converts value, i.e., past, 
materialised, and dead labour into capital, into value big with 
value, a live monster that is fruitful and multiplies. 

If we now compare the two processes of producing value and 
of creating surplus-value, we see that the latter is nothing but 
the continuation of the former beyond a definite point. If on 
the one hand the process be not carried beyond the point, 
where the value paid by the capitalist for the labour-power is 



The Labour Process, 177 

replaced by an exact equivalent, it is simply a process of pro- 
ducing value ; if, on the other hand, it be continued beyond 
that point, it becomes a process of creating surplus-value. 

If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing 
value with the labour-process, pure and simple, we find that 
the latter consists of the useful labour, the work, that produces 
use-values. Here we contemplate the labour as producing a 
particular article ; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone, 
with regard to its end and aim. But viewed as a value-creating 
process, the same labour-process presents itself under its 
quantitative aspect alone. Here it is a question merely of the 
time occupied by the labourer in doing the work; of the period 
during which the labour-power is usefully expended. Here, 
the commodities that take part in the process, do not count 
any longer as necessary adjuncts of labour-power in the pro- 
duction of a definite, useful object. They count merely as 
depositaries of so much absorbed or materialised labour ; that 
labour, whether previously embodied in the means of production, 
or incorporated in them for the first time during the process 
by the action of labour-power, counts in either case only 
according to its duration ; it amounts to so many hours or days 
as the case may be. 

Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production 
of any article is counted, as, under the given social conditions, 
is accessary. The consequences of this are various. In the 
first place, it becomes necessary that the labour should be 
carried on under normal conditions. If a self-acting mule is 
the implement in general use for spinning, it would be absurd 
to supply the spinner with a distaff and spinning wheel. The 
cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause extra waste in 
being worked, but must be of suitable quality. Otherwise the 

Bpinner would be found to spend more time, in producing a 

pound of yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the 

is of lime would create neither value nor money. Bui 

whether the material factors of the process are of normal 

quality or not, depends not upon the labourer, but entirely upon 

the capitalist. Then again, the labour-power itself must be o( 

rage efficacy. In the trade in which it is being emploj 

M 



178 Capitalist Production. 

it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness pre- 
valent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy 
labour-power of such normal goodness. This power must be 
applied with the average amount of exertion and with the 
usual degree of intensity ; and the capitalist is as careful to 
see that this is done, as that his workmen are not idle for a 
single moment. He has bought the use of the labour- power 
for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights. He has 
no intention of being robbed. Lastly, and for this purpose our 
friend has a penal code of his own, all wasteful consumption of 
raw material or instruments of labour is strictlv forbidden, be- 
cause what is so wasted, represents labour superfluously ex- 
pended, labour that does not count in the product or enter into 
its value. 1 

We now see, that the difference between labour, considered 
on the one hand as producing utilities, and on the other hand, 

1 This is one of the circumstances that makes production by slave labour such a 
costly process. The labourer here is, to use a striking expression of the ancients, dis- 
tinguishable only as instrumentum vocale, from an animal as instrumentum semi- 
vocale, and from an implement as instrumentum mutum. But he himself takes care 
tc let both beast and implement feel that he is none of them, but is a man. He con- 
vinces himself with immense satisfaction, that he is a different being, by treating 
the one unmercifully and damaging the other con amore. Hence the principle, uni 
vcrsally applied in this method of production, only to employ the rudest and heavier 
implements and such as are difficult to damage owing to their sheer clumsiness. In 
the slave-states bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, down to the date of the civil war, 
ploughs constructed on old Chinese models, which turned up the soil like a hog or a 
mole, instead of making furrows, were alone to be found. Conf. J. C. Cairns. 
"The Slave Power," London, 1862, p. 40-49. In his "Sea Board Slave States.' 
Olmsted tells us : "I am here shown tools that no man in his senses, with us, would 
allow a labourer, for whom he was paying wages, to be encumbered with ; and the 
excessive weight and clumsiness of which, I would judge, would make work at 
ten per cent greater than with those ordinarily used with us. And I am assured that, 
in the careless and clumsy way they must be used by the slaves, anything lighter or 
less rude could not be furnished them with good economy, and that such tools as we 
constantly give our labourers and find our profit in giving them, would not last out a 
day in a Virginia cornfield — much lighter and more free from stones though it bt 
than ours. So, too, when I ask why mules are so universally substituted for horse* 
on the farm, the first reason given, and confessedly the most conclusive one, is thai 
horses cannot bear the treatment that they always must get from negroes ; horses are 
always soon foundered or crippled by them, while mules will bear cudgelling, or lost 
a meal or two now and then, and not be materially injured, and they do not take cold or 
get sick, if neglected or overworked. But I do not need to go further than to the 
window of the room in which I am writing, to see at almost any time, treatment o 
OP-ttlo that would ensure the immediate discharge of the driver by almost any farnni 
owning them in the North." 



The Labour Process. ^ 



g 



as creating value, a difference which we discovered by our 
analysis of a commodity, resolves itself into a distinction be- 
tween two aspects of the process of production. 

The process of production, considered on the one hand as 
the unity of the labour-process and the process of creating 
value, is production of commodities ; considered on the other 
hand as the unity of the labour-process and the process of pro- 
ducing surplus-value, it is the capitalist process of production, 
or capitalist production of commodities. 

We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus- 
value it does not in the least matter, whether the labour ap- 
propriated by the capitalist be simple unskilled labour of 
average quality or more complicated skilled labour. All labour 
of a higher or more complicated character than average labour 
is expenditure of labour-power of a more costly kind, labour- 
power whose production has cost more time and labour, and 
which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple 
labour-power. This power being of higher value, its consump- 
tion is labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times 
proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. 
Whatever difference in skill there may be between the labour 
of a spinner and that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour 
by which the jeweller merely replaces the value of his own 
labour-power, does not in any way differ in quality from the 
additional portion by which he creates surplus-value. In the 
making of jewellery, just as in spinning, the surplus-value re- 
mits only from a quantitative excess of labour, from a lengthen- 
ing-out of one and the same labour-process, in the one case, of 
the process of making jewels, in the other of the process of 
making yarn. 1 

1 'I ; skilled and unskilled labour rests in j>art on pure ilia* 

the lea it, <>n die! thai have long dnoe ooaied t<> be real, and 

timt rorvive only i>y virtue <>f a traditional oooTention ; In part on the helpletf con 

dition of tome groups <>f the workings oondition that prevent! them from 

exacting equally with the reel the ralue of tii.ir labour-power, accidental oil 

a part, tii'i these two forms <>t" labour sometimes 
■ inco, tli«' physique of the working olssa has di I 
! . and is, relativi Ij speaking, exhausted, which li the east In all oonntrii> with a 
weU developed oapitali I production, the lower forms of labour, which demand 

liturc ol Hi il coni si. '.Hid, oompared with much 

forms of labour ; the I en t<. the l< vel ol unskilled lal 



I So Capitalist Production. 

But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, 
the reduction of skilled labour to average social labour, e.g., 
one day of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is un- 
avoidable. 1 We therefore save ourselves a superfluous opera- 
tion, and simplify our analysis, by the assumption, that the 
labour of the workman employed by the capitalist is unskilled 
average labour. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



CONSTANT CAPITAL AND VARIABLE CAPITAL. 

The various factors of the labour-process play different parts 
in forming the value of the product. 

The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of his labour 
by expending upon it a given amount of additional labour, no 
matter what the specific character and utility of that laboui 
may be. On the other hand, the values of the means of pro- 
duction used up in the process are preserved, and present 
themselves afresh as constituent parts of the value of the pro- 



Take as an example the labour of a bricklayer, which in England occupies a mucl 
higher level than that of a damask-weaver. Again, although the labour of a fustian 
cutter demands great bodily exertion, and is at the same time unhealthy, yet 
counts only as unskilled labour. And then, we must not forget, that the so-calle« 
skilled labour does not occupy a large space in the field of national labour. Laini 
estimates that in England (and Wales) the livelihood of 11,300,000 people depends 
on unskilled labour. If from the total population of 18,000,000 living at the time 
when he wiote, we deduct 1,000,000 for the "genteel population,"' and 1,500,000 
for paupers, vagrants, criminals, prostitutes, &c, and 4,650,000 who compose tin 
middle-class, there remain the above mentioned 11,000,000. But in his middle-claa 
he includes people that live on the interest of small investments, officials, men of 
letters, artists, schoolmasters and the like, and in order to swell the number he also 
includes in these 4,050.00) the better paid portion of the factory operatives ! The 
bricklayers, too, figure amongst them. (S. Laing : "National Distress," &c, London, 
1844.) "The great class who have nothing to give for food but ordinary labour, arc 
the great bulk of the people." (James Mill, in art: "Colony," Supplement to tin 
Encyclop. Brit., 1831.) 

1 " Where reference is made to labour as a measure of value, it necessarily implir: 
labour of one particular kind . . . the proportion which the other kinds bear to it 
being easily ascertained." ( " Outlines of Pol. Econ.," Lond., 1832, pp. 22 and 23.) 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. i 8 1 

duct ; the values of the cotton and the spindle, for instancs, re- 
appear again in the value of the yarn. The value of the 
means of production is therefore preserved, by being trans- 
ferred to the product. This transfer takes place during the 
conversion of those means into a product, or in other words, 
during the labour-process. It is brought about by labour ; but 
how ? 

The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one 
in order to add value to the cotton, the other in order to pre- 
serve the value of the means of production, or, what amounts 
to the same thing, to transfer to the yarn, to the product, the 
value of the cotton on which he works, and part of the value 
of the spindle with which he works. But, by the very act of 
adding new value, he preserves their former values. Since, 
however, the addition of new value to the subject of his labour, 
and the preservation of its former value, are two entirely dis- 
tinct results, produced simultaneously by the labourer, during 
one operation, it is plain that this twofold nature of the 
result can be explained only by the twofold nature of his 
labour ; at one and the same time, it must in one character 
create value, and in another character preserve or transfer 
value. 

Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour 
and consequently new value ? Evidently, only by labouring 
productively in a particular way; the spinner by spinning, the 
weaver by weaving, the smith by forging. But, while thus 
incorporating labour generally, that is value, it is by the par- 
ticular form alone of the labour, by the spinning, the weaving 
and the forging respectively, that the means of production, the 
OOtton and Bpindle, the yarn and loom, and the iron and anvil 
rase constituent elements of the product, of a new use- 
value. 1 Each use-value disappears, but only t<> re-appear under 
a new form in a new use-value. Now, we saw, when we were 

msidering the process of creating value, that, if a use-value 

ffectively consumed in the production of a new use value, 
the quantity of labour expended in the production of the con- 

1 *' labour pivrH a new creation for MM I vtinguihlicd.' ("Ant-Ki\ on tli« I 

1 <>! N.itiMHB," I orulon, LS21, p, L3.) 



1 82 Capitalist Production. 

sumed article, forms a portion of the quantity of labour 
necessary to produce the new use- value ; this portion is there- 
fore labour transferred from the means of production to the 
new product. Hence, the labourer preserves the values of the 
consumed means of production, or transfers them as portions of 
its value to the product, not by virtue of his additional labour, 
abstractedly considered, but by virtue of the particular useful 
character of that labour, by virtue of its special productive 
form. In so far then as labour is such specific productive activ- 
ity, in so far as it is spinning, weaving, or forging, it raises, by 
mere contact, the means of production from the dead, makes 
them living factors of the labour-process, and combines with 
them to form the new products. 

]f the special productive labour of the workman were net 
spinning, he could not convert the cotton into yarn, and there- 
fore could not transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to 
the yarn. Suppose the same workman were to change his 
occupation to that of a joiner, he would still by a day's labour 
add value to the material he works upon. Consequently, we 
see, first, that the addition of new value takes place not by 
virtue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joinerin* 
in particular, but because it is labour in the abstract, a portion 
of the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value 
added is of a given definite amount, not because his labour 
has a special utility, but because it is exerted for a definite 
time. On the one hand, then, it is by virtue of its genera 
character, as being expenditure of human labour-power in the 
abstract, that spinning adds new value to the values of the 
cotton and the spindle ; and on the other hand, it is by virtue 
of its special character, as being a concrete, useful process, that 
the same labour of spinning both transfers the values of the 
means of production to the product, and preserves them in the 
product. Hence at one and the same time there is produce* 1 I 
twofold result. 

By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, 
new value is added, and by the quality of this added 
labour, the original values of the means of production 
are preserved in the product. This twofold effect, resulting 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. 1 83 

from the twofold character of labour, may be traced in various 
phenomena. 

Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to 
spin as much cotton in G hours as he was able to spin before in 
36 hours. His labour is now six times as effective as it 
was, for the purposes of useful production. The product of (> 
hours' work has increased sixfold, from 6 lbs. to 36 lbs. But now 
the '30 lbs. of cotton absorb only the same amount of labour as 
formerly did the G lbs. One-sixth as much new labour isabsorbed 
by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value added by 
the labour to each pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly 
was. On the other hand, in the product, in the 3G lbs. of yarn, 
the value transferred from the cotton is six times as great as 
before. By the G hours' spinning, the value of the raw 
materia] preserved and transferred to the product is six times 
vreat as before, although the new value added by the 
labour of the spinner to each pound of the very same raw 
material is one-sixth what it was formerlv. This shows that the 
two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in 
one case to preserve value, and in the other to create value, are 
essentially different. On the one hand, the longer the time 
accessary to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the 
greater is the new value added to the material ; on the other 
hand, the greater the weight of the cotton spun in a given time, 
the greater is the value preserved, by being transferred from it 
to the product 

Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's 
labour, instead of varying, remains constant, that he therefore 
requires tin- same time as he formerly did, to convert one 
pound of cotton into yarn, but that tie- exchange value of the 

ton varies, either by rising to six times its former value or fall 

ing to one sixth of that value. In both these cases, the spinni 1 

ame quantity of Labour into a pound of cotton, anc 
therefore adds as much value, as he did before tie- change in 
the value : he also produces a given freight <>f yarn in the 
lame time as he did before. Nevertheless, the value that he 
transfers from tie- cotton to tie- yarn is either one-sixth of what 

it was before the Variation, Or, U the dM maybe, six time an 



1 84 Capitalist Production. 

much as before. The same result occurs when the value of the 
instruments of labour rises or falls, while their useful efficacy 
in the process remains unaltered. 

Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process re- 
main unchanged, and no change of value takes place in the 
means of production, the spinner continues to consume in 
equal working-times equal quantities of raw material, and equal 
quantities of machinery of unvarying value. The value that 
he preserves in the product is directly proportional to the new 
value that he adds to the product. In two weeks he incor- 
porates twice as much labour, and therefore twice as mach 
value, as in one week, and during the same time he consumes 
twice as much material, and wears out twice as much 
machinery, of double the value in each case ; he therefore pre- 
serves, in the product of two weeks, twice as much value as in 
the product of one week. So long as the conditions of produc- 
tion remain the same, the more value the labourer adds by 
fresh labour, the more value he transfers and preserves ; but he 
does so merely because this addition of new value takes place 
under conditions that have not varied and are independent of 
his own labour. Of course, it may be said in one sense, that 
the labourer preserves old value always in proportion to the 
quantity of new value that he adds. Whether the value of 
cotton rise from one shilling to two shillings, or fall to six- 
pence, the workman invariably preserves in the product of one 
hour only one half as much value as he preserves in two hours. 
In like manner, if the productiveness of his own labour varies 
by rising or falling, he will in one hour spin either more or less 
cotton, as the case may be, than he did before, and will con- 
sequently preserve in the product of one hour, more or less 
value of cotton ; but, all the same, he will preserve by two 
hours' labour twice as much value as he will by one. 

Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects : we leave 
out of consideration its purely symbolical representation by 
tokens. (Man himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour- 
power, is a natural object, a thing, although a living conscious 
thing, and labour is the manifestation of this power residing in 
him.) If therefore an article loses its utility, it also loses its 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. 185 

value. The reason why means of production do not lose their 
value, at the same time that they lose their use-value, is this : 
they lose in the labour-process the original form of their use- 
value, only to assume in the product the form of a new use-value. 
But, however important it may be to value, that it should have 
some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a matter of 
complete indifference what particular object serves this purpose; 
this we saw when treating of the metamorphosis of commodities. 
Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of pro- 
duction transfer their value to the product only so far as along 
with their use-value they lose also their exchange value. 
They give up to the product that value alone which they 
themselves lose as means of production. But in this respect the 
material factors of the labour-process do not all behave .alike. 

The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a 
trace ; so, too, the tallow with which the axles of wheels are 
greased. Dye stuffs and other auxiliary substances also vanish 
but re-appear as properties of the product. Raw material 
forms the substance of the product, but only after it has changed 
its form. Hence raw material and auxiliary substances lose 
the characteristic form with which they are clothed on entering 
the labour-process. It is otherwise with the instruments of 
labour. Tools, machines, workshops, and vessels, are of use in 
tin- labour-process, only so long as they retain their original 
lhape, and are ready each morning to renew the process with 
their shape unchanged. And just as during their lifetime, 
that is to say, during the continued labour-process in which 
they serve, they retain their shape independent of the product, 
so, too, they do after their death. The corpses of machines, 
tools, workshops, &c, are always separate and distinct from the 
product they helped to turn out. W we now consider the ca8€ 
of any instrument of labour during the whole period of its 
service, from the day of its entry into the workshop, till tie- 
day of its banishment into the lumber room, we find that dur- 
ing this period its use-value has been completely consumed, 
and therefore its exchange value completely transferred to the 

product. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts for 10 yean, 

it is plain that during that working period it, total value is 



1S6 Capitalist Production. 

gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. The life- 
time of an instrument of labour, therefore, is spent in the 
repetition of a greater or less number of similar operations. 
Its life may be compared with that of a human being. Every 
day brings a man 24 hours nearer to his grave : but how many 
days he has still to travel on that road, no man can tell 
accurately by merely looking at him. This difficulty, however, 
does not prevent life insurance offices from drawing, by means 
of the theory of averages, very accurate, and at the same time 
very profitable conclusions. So it is with the instruments of 
labour. It is known by experience how long on the average a 
machine of a particular kind will last. Suppose its use- value 
in the labour-process to last only six days. Then, on the 
average, it loses each day one-sixth of its use-value, and there- 
fore parts with one-sixth of its value to the daily product. The 
wear and tear of all instruments, their daily loss of use- value, 
and the corresponding quantity of value they part with to the 
product, are accordingly calculated upon this basis. 

It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never 
transfer more value to the product than they themselves lose 
during the labour-process by the destruction of their own use- 
value. If such an instrument has no value to lose, if, in other 
words, it is not the product of human labour, it transfers no 
value to the product. It helps to create use- value without con- 
tributing to the formation of exchange value. In this class am 
included all means of production supplied by Nature without 
human assistance, such as land, wind, water, metals in situ, and 
timber in virgin forests. 

Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. 
Suppose a machine to be worth £1000, and to wear out in 1000 
days. Then one thousandth part of the value of the machine 
is daily transferred to the day's product. At the same time, 
though with diminishing vitality, the machine as a whole con- 
tinues to take part in the labour- process. Thus it appears, 
that one factor of the labour-process, a means of production, 
continually enters as a whole into that process, while it enters 
into the process of the formation of value by fractions only. 
The difference between the two processes is here reflected in 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. 187 

their material factors, by the same instrument of production 
taking part as a whole in the labour-process, while at the same 
time as an element in the formation of value, it enters only by 
fractions. 1 

On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a 
whole in the formation of value, while into the labour-process 
it enters only bit by bit. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the 
waste for every 115 lbs. used amounts to 15 lbs., which is con- 
verted, not into yarn, but into " devil's dust." Now, although 
this 15 lbs. of cotton never becomes a constituent element of 
the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to be normal and 
inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its value is 
just as surely transferred to the value of the yarn, as is the 
value of the 100 lbs. that form the substance of the yarn. The 
u.se-value of 15 lbs. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 
lbs. of yarn can be made. The destruction of this cotton is 
therefore a necessary condition in the production of the yarn. 
And because it is a necessary condition, and for no other reason, 
the value of that cotton is transferred to the product. The same 
holds good for every kind of refuse resulting from a labour- 
process, so far at least as such refuse cannot be further employed 
as a means in the production of new and independent use-values- 

1 The subject of repairs of the implements of labour does not concern us here. A 
Machine that is undergoing repair, no longer plays the part of an instrument, but 
that of a subject of labour. Work is no longer done with it, but upon it. It is quite 
permissible for our purpose to assume, that the labour expended on the repairs of in 
itrnments is included in the labour necessary for their original production, nut in 
tin- text we deal with that wear and tear, which no doctor oan cure, and which little 

hy little brings about death, with " that kind of wear which cannot be up tired from 
time to time, and which, in the oatC of a knife, wovdd ultimately i educe it to a state- 
in which the cutlei would say of it, it is not worth a nen blade." We bare shewn in 
tli^ text, that a macln iic takes pari In erery labour piocessasan integral machine, but 
that into th< simultaneous proot renting ratae it enters only bit by bit Bon 

! hen is the confusion <>t ideal exliibited in the following extract ! " Mr. Etioardo 

•ays a portion of the labour of the engineer in making [stocking] machines" is 

ned f"i example in the value of a pair of itookinga, " Yet the total labour, 
that prod uoed each tingle pair of stockings .... includes the whole labour of 
khe engineer, not a portion ; for one machine makes many pairs, and none of shone 

could bavi been done without any part of the machine." ("Obe. on eei tain » 
disputes in Pol. Boon, particularly relating toYaltte,"p. 54.) The author, an uncommonly 
itisfled wiseacre, is right in hit confusion and therefore in hie contention, to this 
i only tliat neither Rioardo nor any othei economiat, before or ainoe him, hai 
it<lv distinguished th< two tepeeti of labour, and "till less, therefore, the part 
pluyed hy it andei esv l> of these aepeeti in the formation ui value. 



1 8 8 . ^ Capitalist Production . 

Such an employment of refuse may be seen in the large machine 
works at Manchester, where mountains of iron turnings are 
carted away to the foundry in the evening, in order the next 
morning to re-appear in the workshops as solid masses ol 
iron. 

We have seen that the means of production transfer value to 
the new product, so far only as during the labour-process they 
lose value in the shape of their old use- value. The maximum 
loss of value that they can suffer in the process, is plainly 
limited by the amount of the original value with which they 
came into the process, or in other words, by the labour- time 
necessary for their production. Therefore, the means of pro- 
duction can never add more value to the product than they 
themselves possess independently of the process in which they 
assist. However useful a given kind of raw material, or a 
machine, or other means of production may be, though it ma} T 
cost £150, or, say, 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any 
circumstances, add to the value of the product more than £150. 
Its value is determined not by the labour-process into w r hich it 
enters as a means of production, but by that out of which it has 
issued as a product. In the labour-process it only serves as a 
mere use-value, a thing with useful properties, and could not, 
therefore, transfer any value to the product, unless it possessed 
such value previously. 1 

1 From this we may judge of the absurdity of J. B. Say, who pretends to account 
for surplus-value (Interest, Profit, Rent), by the "services productifs " which the 
means of production, soil, instruments, and raw material, render in the labour-process 
by means of their use-values. Mr. Wm. Roscher who seldom loses an occasion of re- 
gistering, in black and white, ingenious apologetic fancies, records the following 
specimen : — " J. B. Say (Traite, t. 1. ch. 4) very truly remarks : the value produced 
by an oil mill, aftar deduction of all costs, is something new, something quite different 
from the labour by which the oil mill itself was erected." (1. c, p. 82, note.) Very 
true, Mr. Professor ! the oil produced by the oil mill is iudeed something very different 
from the labour expended in constructing the mill ! By value, Mr Roscher under- 
stand* such stuff as " oil," because oil has value, notwithstanding that " Nature " pro- 
duces petroleum, though relatively " in small quantities," a fact to which he seems to 
refer in his further observation : " It (Nature) produces scarcely any exchange-value." 
Mr. Roscher's "Nature" and the exchange-value it produces are rather like the 
foolish virgin who admitted indeed that she had had a child, but " it was such a little 
one." This "savant serieux " in continuation remarks : " Ricardo's school is in the 
habit of including capital aa accumulated labour under the head of labour. This is 
unskilful work, because, indeed, the owner of capital, after all, does something more 
titan the merely creating and preset ving of the same: namely, the abstention from 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. 1 89 

While productive labour is changing the means of produc- 
tion into constituent elements of a new product, their value 
undergoes a metempsychosis. Tt deserts the consumed body, 
to occupy the newly created one. But this transmigration 
takes place, as it were, behind the back of the labourer. He 
is unable to add new labour, to create new value, without a 
the same time preserving old values, and this, because th 
labour he adds must be of a specific useful kind : and he can- 
not do work of a useful kind, without employing products as 
the means of production of a new product, and thereby trans- 
ferring their value to the new product. The property there- 
fore which labour- power in action, living labour, possesses of 
preserving value, at the same time that it adds it, is a gift of 
Nature which costs the labourer nothing, but which is very- 
advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it preserves the 
existing value of his capital. 1 So long as trade is good, the 
capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take 
notice of this gratuitous gift of labour. A violent interruption 
of the labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware 
of it. 2 

As regards the means of production, what is really consumed 
is their use-value, and the consumption of this use-value by labour 

the enjoyment of it, for which he demands, cji., interest." (L 0.) How very "skil- 
ful "is this " anatomico-physiological method "of political economy, which, "indeed," 
converts a men desire "after all" into a source of value. 

1 "Of all the instruments of the farmers' trade, the labour of man ... is that on 
which In- is most to rely for the repayment of his capital. The other two . . . the work 
ing stock of the cattle and the . . . carts, ploughs, spades, and so forth, without ■ 
given portion of the first, are nothing at all." (Edmund Burke : " Thoughts and De- 
tails on Scarcity, originally presented to the Right Hon. W. Pitt, in the month of 
November 17!t.~»," Edit. London, 1800, p. 10.) 

■ In " The Timet " of 26th November, 1862, a manufacturer, whose mill employed 
800 hands, and consumed, on she average, 160 bales <>f Bast Indian, or L90 hales of 
American cotton, complains, in doleful manner, of the standing expenses of hie 
factory when not working. He estimates them at L'i'»,000 a year. Among them are 
A number of Items that do not concern us here, such as rent, rates, and taxes, in 

soranoe, salaries of the manager, hook keeper, engineer, and others. Then he reckons 

B160 for coal used to heal the mill oceasionally, and run the engine now and then, 

Besides this, he includes the wag< * of the people employed at odd timet to keep the 
machinery In working order, lastly, he puts down 1'1,'Joo foe depreciation of 
machinery, because " the weather and the natural principle of decay do not suspend 
op< i .it ions because the -t« %va i nginc ceases to revolve," He says, emphatically, 
ii>- does not estimate ins depreciation .it more than the small nun of £1 
ln-i machinery Is i! i iriy worn out. 



190 Capitalist Production. 

results in the product. There is no consumption of their value,' 
and it would therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. 
It is rather preserved ; not by reason of any operation it under- 
goes itself in the process ; but. because the article in which it 
originally exists, vanishes, it is true, but vanishes into some 
other article. Hence, in the value of the product, there is a 
re-appearance of the value of the means of production, but 
there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction of that value. That 
which is produced is a new use- value in which the old exchange- 
value re-appears. 2 

It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-pro- 
cess, with labour-power in action. While the labourer, by 
virtue of his labour being of a specialised kind that has a 
special object, preserves and transfers to the product the value 
of the means of production, he at the same time, by the mere 
act of working, creates each instant an additional or new value. 
Suppose the process of production to be stopped just when the 
workman has produced an equivalent for the value of his own 
labour-power, when, for example, by six hours' labour, he has 
added a value of three shillings. This value is the surplus, of 
the total value of the product, over the portion of its value 
that is due to the means of production. It is the only original 
bit of value formed during this process, the only portion of the 
value of the pruduct created by this process. Of course, we 

1 "Productive consumption . . . where the consumption of a commodity is a part of 
the process of production. . . . In these instances there is nc consumption of value." 
(S. P. Newman, 1. c. p. 293.) 

2 In an American compendium that has gone through, perhaps, 20 editions, this 
passage occurs: "It matters not in what form capital re-appears ; " then after a 
lengthy enumeration of all the possible ingredients of production whose value re- 
appears in the product, the passage concludes thus: "The various kinds of food, 
clothing, and shelter, necessary for the existence and comfort of the human being, 
are also changed. They are consumed from time to time, and their value re-appears 
in that new vigour imparted to his body and mind, forming fresh capital, to be em- 
ployed again in the work of production." (F. Way land, 1. c. pp. 31, 32 ) Without 
noticing any other oddities, it suflices to observe, that what re-appears in the fresh 
vigour, is not the bread's price, but its blood-forming substances. What, on the 
other hand, re-appears in the value of that vigour, is not the means of subsistence, 
but their value. The same necessaries of life, at half the price, would form just as 
much muscle and bone, just as much vigour, but not vigour of the same value. This 
confusion of " value " and " vigour " coupled with our author's pharisaical indefinite* 

mark an attempt, futile for all that, to thrash out an explanation of surplus- 
value from a mere re-appearance of pro-existing values. 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. 191 

do not forget that this new value only replaces the money 
advanced by the capitalist in the purchase of the labour-power, 
and spent by the labourer on the necessaries of life. With 
regard to the money spent, the new value is merely a repro- 
duction ; but, nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as in the 
case of the value of the means of production, only an apparent, 
reprod action. The substitution of one value for another, is 
here effected by the creation of new value. 

We know, however, from what has gone before, that the 
labour-process may continue beyond the time necessary to re- 
produce and incorporate in the product a mere equivalent for 
the value of the labour-power. Instead of the six hours that 
are sufficient for the latter purpose, the process may continue 
for twelve hours. The action of labour-power, therefore, not 
only reproduces its own value, but produces value over and 
above it. This surplus-value is the difference between the 
value of the product and the value of the elements consumed 
in the formation of that product, in other words, of the means 
of production and the labour-power. 

By our explanation of the different parts played by the vari- 
ous factors of the labour-process in the formation of the pro- 
ducts value, we have, in fact, disclosed the characters of the 
different functions allotted to the different elements of capital 
in the process of expanding its own value. The surplus of the 
total value of the product, over the sum of the values of its 
constituent factors, is the surplus of the expanded capital over 
the capital originally advanced. The means of production on 
one hand, labour-power on the other, are merely the differ- 
ent modes of existence which the value of the original capital 
imed when from being money it was transformed into the 
various factors of the labour-process That part of capita! 
thru, which is represented by the means of production, by the 
raw material, auxiliary material and the instruments of labour, 
does not, in the process of production, undergo any quantitative 
alteration of value. I therefore call it the constant part <>t' 

ital, or, more shortly, constant capital 

< m the other hand, thai pari of capital, represented by 
ur-power, does, in the process of production undergo an 



igi Capitalist Production. 

alteration of value. It both reproduces the equivalent of itg 
own value, and also produces an excess, a surplus-value, which 
may itself vary, may be more or less according to circumstances. 
This part of capital is continually being transformed from a 
constant into a variable magnitude. I therefore call it the 
variable part of capital, or, shortly, variable capital. The same 
elements of capital which, from the point of view of the 
labour-process, present themselves respectively as the objective 
and subjective factors, as means of production and labour- 
power, present themselves, from the point of view of the pro- 
cess of creating surplus- value, as constant and variable capital. 
The definition of constant capital given above by no means 
excludes the possibility of a change of value in its elements. 
Suppose the price of cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, 
and the next day, in consequence of a failure of the cotton crop, 
a shilling a pound. Each pound of the cotton bought at six- 
pence, and worked up after the rise in value, transfers to the 
product a value of one shilling ; and the cotton already spun 
before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as yarn, 
likewise transfers to the product twice its original value. It 
is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent 
of the increment or surplus-value added to the value of the 
cotton by the spinning itself. If the old cotton had never 
been spun, it could, after the rise, be resold at a shilling a 
pound instead of at sixpence. Further, the fewer the processes 
the cotton has gone through, the more certain is this result. 
We therefore find that speculators make it a rule when such 
sudden changes in value occur, to speculate in that material on 
which the least possible quantity of labour has been spent : to 
speculate, therefore, in yarn rather than in cloth, in cotton it- 
self, rather than in yarn. The change of value in the case w* 
have been considering, originates, not in the process in which the 
cotton plays the part of a means of production, and in which it 
therefore functions as constant capital, but in the process in 
which the cotton itself is produced. The value of a commodity, 
it is true, is determined by the quantity of labour contained in 
it, but this quantity is itself limited by social conditions. If 
the time socially necessary for the production of any com 



Constant Capital and Variable Capital. 193 

modity alters — and a given weight of cotton represents, after a 
bad harvest, more labour than after a good one — all previously 
existing commodities of the same class are affected, because they 
are, as it were, only individuals of the species, 1 and their 
value at any given time is measured by the labour socially 
necessary, i.e., by the labour necessary for their production 
under the then existing social conditions. 

As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may 
that of the instruments of labour, of the machinery, &c, em- 
ployed in the process ; and consequently that portion of the 
value of the product transferred to it from them, may also 
change. If in consequence of a new invention, machinery of a 
particular kind can be produced by a diminished expenditure 
of labour, the old machinery becomes depreciated more or less, 
and consequently transfers so much less value to the product. 
But here again, the change in value originates outside the 
process in which the machine is acting as a means of pro- 
duction. Once engaged in this process, the machine cannot 
transfer more value than it possesses apart from the process. 

Just as a change in the value of the means of pro- 
duction, even after they have commenced to take a part in the 
labour process, does not alter their character as constant 
capital, so, too, a change in the proportion of constant to 
variable capital does not affect the respective functions of these 
two kinds of capital. The technical conditions of the labour 
process may be revolutionised to such an extent, that where 
formerly ten men using ton implements of small value worked 
up a relatively small quantity of raw material, one man may 
now, with the aid of one expensive machine, work up one 
hundred times as much raw material. In the latter case we 
bave an enormous increase in the constant capital, that is re- 
presented by the total value of the means of product inn used, 
and at the same time a great reduction in the variable capital, 
invested in labour-power. Such a revolution, however, altera 
<»iily the quantitative relation between the constant ami the 

1 'Toutei l<-s produotioni d"un mAmc |MN m fanntnt proproment quNuM do i 
''""t i<- i>n\ m ti'-tt-i niiiif en general ei M&iegard tux riroonitanoti pnrtioulidi 
rrotne, 1. o., p. 803.) 

M 



194 Capitalist Production. 

variable capital, or the proportions in which the total capital 
is split up into its constant and variable constituents ; it hai 
not in the least degree affected the essential difference between 
the two. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE RATE OF SURPLUS- VALUE. 

SECTION 1. — THE DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF LABOUR-POWER. 

The surplus-value generated in the process of production by C 
the capital advanced, or in other words, the self-expansion <>f 
the value of the capital C, presents itself for our consideration 
in the first place, as a surplus, as the amount by which the 
value of the product exceeds the value of its constituent 
elements. 

The capital C is made up of two components, one, the sun 
of money c laid out upon the means of production, and th 
other, the sum of money v expended upon the labour-powei 
c represents the portion that has become constant capital, an< 
v the portion that has become variable capital. At first ther 
C=c+v: for example, if £500 is the capital advanced, its com 
ponents may be such that the £500=£4<10 const. + £90 va 
When the process of production is finished, we get a con 
modity whose value=(c + v) + s, where s is the surplus- value 
or taking our former figures, the value of this commodity ruj 
be (£410 const. + £90 var.) + £90 surpl. The original capiti 
has now changed from C to C, from £500 to £590. The diffe 
ence is s or a surplus value of £90. Since the value of i 
constituent elements of the product is equal to the value 
the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, that the e: 
cess of the value of the product over the value of its constit 
ent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital advana 
or to the surplus-value produced. 

Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little nn 



The Rate of Surplus-value. 195 

closely. The two tilings compared are, the value of the pro- 
duct and the value of its constituents consumed in the process 
of production. Now we have seen how that portion of the 
constant capital which consists of the instruments of labour, 
transfers to the product only a fraction of its value, while the 
remainder of that value continues to reside in those instru- 
ments. Since this remainder plays no part in the formation of 
value, we may at present leave it on one side. To introduce it 
into the calculation would make no difference. For instance, 
taking our former example, c=£410: suppose this sum to con- 
sist of £312 value of raw material, £44 value of auxiliary 
material, and £54 value of the machinery worn away in the 
process ; and suppose that the total value of the machinery 
employed is £1,054. Out of this latter sum, then, we reckon 
as advanced for the purpose of turning out the product, the 
sum of £54 alone, which the machinery loses by wear and 
r in the process ; for this is all it parts with to the product. 
Now if we also reckon the remaining £1,000, which still con- 
tinues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we 
ought also to reckon it as part of the value advanced, and thus 
make it appear on both sides of our calculation. 1 We should, 
in this way, get £1,500 on one side and £1,590 on the other. 
The difference of these two sums, or the surplus-value, would 
still be £!»(). Throughout this Book therefore, by constant 
capita] advanced for the production of value, we always mean, 
unless the context is repugnant thereto, the value of the means 
of production actually consumed in the process, and thai value 
alon 

This being so, lei us return to tin- formula C^c-f v, which 
wc saw was transformed into C'^(c + vj + s, C becoming I 
We know thai the value of the constant capital is transferred 
and merely re-appears in the produ t The new value 
lally created in the process the value; produced, or vain 
product, is therefore noi the same as the value of the produd 
not, as it would at first Bighi appear c+v -4-8 or £410 

1 " If w.- r.ckon the Valve "I tii«' fi\'<l capital employed M • part of the advann i, 

*• n* 1, the re maining ralue of raoh capital al tl ■ ■ ■ ml >>f ii 

of the annual retail tfcue, "I'iim. ofFoLBoOB ' 'J ml td., Loitd .,!«::•■ p 



196 Capitalist Production. 

const +£90 var. + £90 surpl.; but v + s or £90 var.+£90 surp! 
not £590 but £180. If c=o, or in other words, if there wcr 
branches of industry in which the capitalist could dispense 
with all means of production made by previous labour, whethe: 
they be raw material, auxiliary material, or instruments 
labour, employing only labour-power and materials supplie< 
by Nature, in that case, there would be no constant capital t< 
transfer to the product. This component of the value of tb< 
product, i.e., the £410 in our example, would be eliminated 
but the sum of £180, the amount of new value created, or tin 
value produced, which contains £90 of surplus- value, wouli 
remain just as great as if c represented the highest vahn 
imaginable. We should have C=(0+v)=v or C the expande< 
capital=v+s and therefore C — C=s as before. On the othe 
hand, if s=0, or in other words, if the labour-power, whosi 
value is advanced in the form of variable capital, were to pio 
duce only its equivalent, we should have C=c+v or C tin 
value of the product=(c+v)+0 or C=C. The capital advance* 
would, in this case, not have expanded its value. 

From what has gone before, we know that surplus-value i 
purely the result of a variation in the value of v, of that portioi 
of the capital which is transformed into labour-power ; con 
sequently, v + s = v + v' or v plus an increment of v. But th 
fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of tha 
variation, are obscured by the circumstance that inconsequent 
of the increase in the variable component of the capital, ther 
is also an increase in the sum total of the advanced capital. I 
was originally £500 and becomes £590. Therefore in ordc 
that our investigation may lead to accurate results, we mufl 
make abstraction from that portion of the value of the pro 
duct, in which constant capital alone appears, and consequent!; 
must equate the constant capital to zero or make c = 0. Tin 
is merely an application of a mathematical rule, employe* 
whenever we operate with constant and variable magnitude: 
related to each other by the symbols of addition and sub 
traction only. 

A further difficulty is caused by the original form of th 
variable capital. In our example, C £410 const. + £90 vai 



The Rate of Surplus-value. 197 

+ £00 surpl. ; but £90 is a given and therefore a constant 
quantity ; hence it appears absurd to treat it as variable. But 
in fact, the term £90 var. is here merely a symbol to show that 
this value undergoes a process. The portion of the capital in- 
vested in the purchase of labour-power is a definite quantity of 
materialised labour, a constant value like the value of the 
labour-power purchased. But in the process of production the 

lace of the £90 is taken by the labour-power in action, dead 
labour is replaced by living labour, something stagnant by 
something flowing, a constant by a variable. The result is the 

•production of v plus an increment of v. From the point of 
view then of capitalist production, the whole process appears 
xs the spontaneous variation of the originally constant value, 
which is transformed into labour-power. Both the process and 
its result, appear to be owing to this value. If, therefore, such 
expressions as "£90 variable capital," or " so much self- 
txpanding value," appear contradictory, this is only because 
hey bring to the surface a contradiction immanent in capitalist 
production. 

At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the 
bant capital to zero. Yet it is what we do every day. If, 
0C example, we wish to calculate the amount of England's 
troths from the cotton industry, we first of all deduct the sums 
aid for cotton to the United States, India, Egypt and other 
sonntries ; in other words, the value of the capital th;it merely 
B-appears in the value of the product, is put = 0. 

Of course the ratio of surplus-value not only to that portion 

>f the capital from which it immediately springs, and w\n 

hange of value it represents, but also to the sum total of* the 

•apit;il advanced is economically of very great importance. 

hall, therefore, in the third book, treat of this ratio ex- 

i.'iii lively. In order to enable one portion of B capital to e\- 

and its value by being converted into labour-power, it is 
y that another portion be converted into means oi pro- 
lactin In order that variable capital may perform its 
unction, con tant capital musl be advanced in proper proportion, 
proportion given by the Bpecial technical conditions of each 
ibour-process. The circumstance, however, that retorte and 



198 Capitalist Production. 

other vessels, are necessary to a chemical process, does not 
compel the chemist to notice them in the result of his anah 
If we look at the means of production, in their relation to the 
creation of value, and to the variation in the quantity of value, 
apart from anything else, they appear simply as the material 
in which labour-power, the value-creator, incorporates itself. 
Neither the nature, nor the value of this material is of any 
importance. The only requisite is that there be a sufficient 
supply to absorb the labour expended in the process of pro- 
duction. That supply once given, the material may rise or 
fall in value, or even be, as land and the sea, without any value 
in itself; but this will have no influence on the creation of value 
or on the variation in the quantity of value. 1 

In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. 
The capital advanced is consequently reduced from c+v to v, 
and instead of the value of the product (c+v)4s we have now 
the value produced (v+s). Given the new value produced = 
£180, which sum consequently represents the whole labour ex- 
pended during the process, then subtracting from it £90 the 
value of the variable capital, we have remaining £90, the 
amount of the surplus- value. This sum of £90 or s expresses 
the absolute quantity of surplus-value produced. The relative 
quantity produced, or the increase per cent of the variable 
capital, is determined, it is plain, by the ratio of the surplus- 
value to the variable capital, or is expressed by \. In our 
example this ratio is £&, which gives an increase of 100 %. 
This relative increase in the value of the variable capital, or 
the relative magnitude of the surplus- value, I call, " The rate 
of surplus- value." 

We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the 
labour-process, produces only the value of his labour-power, 
that is, the value of his means of subsistence. Now since his 

1 What Lucretius says is self-evident ; " nil posse creari de nihilo," out of nothing, 
nothing can be created. Creation of value is transformation of labour-power into 
labour. Labour-power itself is energy transferred to a human organism by means of 
nourishing matter. 

- In the same way that the English use the terms "rate of profit," "rate of in- 
terest."' We shall see, in Book III., that the rate of profit is no mystery, so soon M 
we know the laws of surplus-value. If we reverse the process, we cannot compre- 
hend either the one or the other. 



The Rate of Surplus -value. 1 99 

work forms part of a system, based on the social division of 
labour, he does not directly produce the actual necessaries 
which he himself consumes ; he produces instead a particular 
commodity, yarn for example, whose value is equal to the 
value of those necessaries or of the money with which they 
can be bought. The portion of his day's labour devoted to 
this purpose, will be greater or less, in proportion to the value 
of the necessaries that he daily requires on an average, or, 
what amounts to the same thing, in proportion to the labour- 
time required on an average to produce them. If the value 
of those necessaries represent on an average the expenditure 
of six hours' labour, the workman must on an average work 
for six hours to produce that value. If instead of working for 
the capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he 
would, other things being equal, still be obliged to labour for 
the same number of hours, in order to produce the value of 
his labour-power, and thereby to gain the means of subsistence 
•ssary for his conservation or continued reproduction. But 
as we have seen, during that portion of his day's labour in 
which he produces the value of his labour-power, say three 
shillings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his 
labour-power already advanced by the capitalist ; the new 
value created only replaces the variable capital advanced. It 
is owing to this fact, that the production of the new value of 
three shillings takes the semblance of a mere reproduction. 
That portion of the working day, then, during which this re- 
production take place, I call "necessary" labour-time, and the 
labour expended during that time I call "necessary " labour. 1 
Necessary, as regards the labourer, because independent of the 
particular social form of his labour; necessary, as regards 
capital, and the world of capitalists, because on the continued 
itence of the labourer depends their existence also. 
During the second period of the labour-process, that in 

1 In thifl work, we h:ivo, up to now, employed tho term "necesvwy IsVboOf time," to 

nate the time necessary under given social oonditioni for tin- production <>f ™»v 

commodity. Henceforward we bm it to dtafgMfctt iiIho the time nece.HHiiry for Um 

production of the particular commodity labour power. Tho une of our %md the MMM 

•tohnioal tt rin in different MUM i* inconvenient, but in no science can it !»•« 

ether avoided. Compare, for Inatanoe, the higher »*itli the lowet breach • 
mathematics. 



200 Capitalist Production. 

which his labour is no longer necessary labour, the workman, 
it is true, labours, expends labour-power; but his labour, being 
no longer necessary labour, he creates no value for himself. 
He creates surplus-value which, for the capitalist, has all the 
charms of a creation out of nothing. This portion of the 
working day, I name surplus labour-time, and to the labour 
expended during that time, I give the name of surplus-labour. 
It is every bit as important, for a correct understanding of 
surplus-value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of surplus- 
labour-time, as nothing but materialised surplus-labour, as it 
is, for a proper comprehension of value, to conceive it as a mere 
congelation of so many hours of labour, as nothing but ma- 
terialised labour. The essential difference between the various 
economic forms of society, between, for instance, a society 
based on slave labour, and one based on wage labour, lies only 
in the mode in which this surplus-labour is in each case ex- 
tracted from the actual producer, the labourer. 1 

Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital 
and of the labour-power purchased by that capital are equal, 
and the value of this labour-power determines the necessary 
portion of the working day ; and since, on the other hand, the 
surplus-value is determined by the surplus portion of the 
working day, it follows that surplus-value bears the same ratio 
to variable capital, that surplus-labour does to necessary labour, 
or in other words, the rate of surplus- value - = 8ur P!?»J»*>H- e 

» r v necessary labour 

Both ratios, ?• and i ur P lu8 Jf « ur express the same thing in different 

' v necessary labour' l o 

ways ; in the one case by reference to materialised, incorporated 
labour, in the other by reference to living, fluent labour. 
The rate of surplus-value is therefore an exact expression 

1 Herr Wilhelm Thucydides Roscher has found a mare's nest. He has made the 
important discovery that if, on the one hand, the formation of surplus-value, or 
surplus-produce, and the consequent accumulation of capital, is now-a-days due to 
the thrift of the capitalist, on the other hand, in the lowest stages of civilisation it is 
the strong who compel the weak to economise (1. c. p. 78). To economise what? 
Labour ? Or superfluous wealth that does not exist ? What is it that makes such 
men as Roscher account for the origin of surplus-value, by a mere rechauffe of the 
more or less plausible excuses by the capitalist, for his appropriation of surplus-value ? 
It is, besides their real ignorance, their apologetic dread of a scientific analysis of 
value and surplus-value, and of obtaining a result, possibly not altogether palatable 
to the powers that be. 



7 he Rate of Sti rplus-va hie. 2 o 1 

for the degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of 
the labourer by the capitalist. 1 

We assumed in our example, that the value of the product 
= £410 const. + £00 var. + £00 surpl., and that the capital 
advanced = £500. Since the surplus-value = £00, and the ad- 
vanced capital = £500, we should, according to the usual way 
of reckoning, get as the rate of surplus value (generally con- 
founded with rate of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly 
to cause a pleasant surprise to Mr. Carey and other harmon- 
B. But in truth, the rate of surplus-value is not equal 
to £ or — 8 - v - but to ~ : thus it is not £f but fg or 100%, which 
h more than five times the apparent degree of exploitation. 
Although, in the case we have supposed, we are ignorant of 
the actual length of the working day, and of the duration in 
days or weeks of the labour-process, as also of the number of 
labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus-value ^ accurately 
discloses to us, bv means of its equivalent expression, — urplu9 '^ ur 

> J T. I ' necessary labour 

the relation between the two parts of the working day. This 
relation is here one of equality, the rate being 100%. Hence, 
it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one half of the 
day for himself, the other half for the capitalist. 

The method of calculating the rate of surplus- value is there- 
1, shortly, as follows. We take the total value of the product 
and put the constant capital which merely re-appears in it, 
equal to zero. What remains, is the only value that has, in the 
process of producing the commodity, been actually created. W 
the amount of surpl us- value be given, we have only to deduct 
>t from this remainder, to find the variable capital. And vice 
'/, if the latter be given, and we require to find the surplus- 
value If both be given, we have only to perform the conclud- 
ing operation, viz., to calculate * , the ratio of the BUrplus-value 
to the variable capital. 

■Although tin rate of iurplue«Ya]ue ii in i cent expreeeira for the degree of 
ploitation of labour-power, it i>. In noeenie, an expreeeiou foe the an><»h»t <■ amount 
ploitation. For example, if the neoeeearj labour *■ ■"• boon and the rarplui 
labour - •'• bourt, the d exploitation is LOO . The amount of exploitation hi 

tired by ■ > bourn. If, on tin- other hand, the n 6 hour* 

MM tin- lurplus-labour *■ G hours, the on remains, us 1" I 

100%, while the actual amount of exploitation he namely from Ave 

bum it to nix. 



202 Capitalist Production. 

Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by 
means of a few examples, to exercise the reader in the applica- 
tion of the novel principles underlying it. 

First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 
10,000 mule spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from American 
cotton, and producing 1 lb. of yarn weekly per spindle. We 
assume the waste to be 6 % : under these circumstances 10,000 
lbs. of cotton are consumed weekly, of w r hich 600 lbs. go to 
waste. The price of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7fd. per 
lb. ; the raw material therefore costs in round numbers £342. 
The 10,000 spindles, including preparation -machinery, and 
motive power, cost, we will assume, £1 per spindle, amounting 
to a total of £10,000. The wear and tear we put at 10 %, or 
£1000 yearly — £20 weekly. The rent of the building we 
suppose to be £300 a year, or £6 a week. Coal consumed (for 
100 horse-power indicated, at 4 lbs. of coal per horse-power per 
hour during (,() hours, and inclusive of that consumed in heating 
the mill), 11 tons a week at 8s. Od. a ton, amounts to about £4t\ 
a week: gas, £1 a week, oil,&c.,£4J a week. Total cost of the above 
auxiliary materials, £10 weekly. Therefore the constant portion 
of the value of the week's product is £378. Wages amount 
to £52 a week. The price of the yarn is 12£d. per lb., which 
gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. the sum of £510. The surplu* 
vaiue is therefore in this case £510 — £430 — £80. We put 
the constant part of the value of the product — 0, as it play] 
no part in the creation of value. There remains £132 as tin 
weekly value created, which = £52 var. <£S0 surpl. Tin 
rate of surplus- value is therefore «o = 153-H /'. In a working 

l 5i /O ~ 

day of 10 hours with average labour the result is : necessary 
labour = 3tt hours, and surplus-labour = 6?%} 

One more example. Jacob gives the following calculation for 
the year 1815. Owing to the previous adjustment of several 
items it is very imperfect ; nevertheless for our purpose it is 
sufficient. In it he assumes the price of wheat to be Ss. a 
quarter, and the average yield per acre to be 22 bushels. 

1 The above data, which may he relied upon, were given me by a Manchester spinner. 
In England the horse-power of an engine was formerly calculated from the diameter 
of its cylinder, now the actual horse-power shown by the indicator is taken. 



Seed, 


- £1 9 





Manure, 


2 10 





Want's, 


3 10 






The Rate of Surplus-value. 203 

Value Produced Per Acre. 

Tithes, Rates, and 

Taxes, - - £1 1 
Rent, - - 18 

Farmers Profit and 

Interest, - 12 



Total, -£790 



Total, - £3 11 



Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its 
value, we here find the surplus-value distributed under the 
various heads of profit, interest, rent, &c. We have nothing to 
do with these in detail ; we simply add them together, and the 
sum is a surplus-value of £3 lis. Od. The sum of £3 19s. 0d., 
paid for seed and manure, is constant capital, and we put it 
equal to zero. There is left the sum of £3 10s. 0d., which is 
the variable capital advanced : and we see that a new value of 
£3 10s. 0d. -1- £3 lis. Od. has been produced in its place. 
Therefore " = JJ ~ *) , giving a rate of surplus-value of more 
than 100 °/ Q . The labourer employs more than one half of his 
working day in producing the surplus-value, which different 
persons, under different pretexts, share amongst themselves. 1 



SECTION 2.— THE REPRESENTATION OF THl COMPOHSRTi ok THE vai.T'K of 
THE PRODUCT BY OOBJLB&FOND I ETG 1'ROPORTIONAL PARTS OF TIIK PK-> 
Hf(T ITSKI.K. 

Let us now i< turn to the example by which we were shown 
how tin; capitalist converts money into capital. 

The product of a working day of L2 hours is *jo lbs. of yam, 
bavins a value of 30a No less than *ths of this value, or 24 
i^ dm- to mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of 
production _ ( ) Lbs. of cotton, value 20s*, and spindle worn away, 
Is.): it is therefore constant capital. The remaining ,*ths or 
8a is the new value created during the spinning process: ol 

1 Ti itioiiH niven in Um btsfl art" int • m>1i<1 mrnly :i* UuttrttiOBI W% iMMTt 

nniii that priooi \.iln<-H. w.- iholl, bowertr, •"•••. In Book III., Mint 

«'v.'ii in tin- (MM.- of" 1 priOM Um assumption c.mimt bfl HUMM in thifl Vi ■ )" lilOpU 

in. imi' 1 



204 Capitalist Production. 

this one half replaces the value of the day's labour-power, or the 
variable capital, the remaining half constitutes a surplus-value 

of 3s. The total value then of the 20 lbs. of yarn is made up 
as follows : 

30s. value of yarn = 24s. const. + 3s. var. + 3s. surpl. 

Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. of 
yarn produced, it follows that the various component parts of 
this value, can be represented as being contained respectively 
in corresponding parts of the product. 

If the value of 30s. is contained in 20 lbs. of yarn, then ^ ths 
of this value, or the 24s. that form its constant part, is con- 
tained in ^ths of the product or in 16 lbs. of yarn. Of the 
latter 1 3J lbs. represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. 
worth of cotton spun, and 2| lbs. represent the 4s. worth of 
spindle, &u, worn away in the process. 

Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 
lbs. of yarn, is represented by 13 J lbs. of yarn. This latter 
weight of yarn contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13J 
lbs. of cotton, worth 13 J shillings ; but the 6§ shillings additional 
value contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton consumed 
in spinning the remaining 6§ lbs. of yarn. The effect is the 
same as if these 6§ lbs. of yarn contained no cotton at all, and 
the whole 20 lbs. of cotton were concentrated in the 13 \ lbs. of 
varn. The latter weight, on the other hand, does not contain 
an atom either of the value of the auxiliary materials and imple- 
ments, or of the value newly created in the process. 

In the same way, the 2| lbs. of yarn, in which the 4s., the re- 
mainder of the constant capital, is embodied, represents nothing 
but the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of 
labour consumed in producing the 20 lbs. of yarn. 

We have, therefore, arrived at this result : although eight- 
tenths of the product, or 10 lbs. of yarn, is, in its character of 
an article of utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's 
labour, as the remainder of the same product, yet when viewed 
in this connexion, it does not contain, and has not absorbed 
any labour expended during the process of spinning. It is just 
as if the cotton had converted itself into yarn, without help; 
as if the shape it had assumed was mere trickery and deceit: 



The Rate of Surplus-value. 205 

for so soon as our capitalist selh it for 24s., and with the money 
replaces his means of production, it becomes evident that this 
16 lbs. of yarn is nothing more than so much cotton and spindle- 
waste in disguise. 

On the other hand, the remaining ^ ths of the product, or 4 
lbs. of yarn, represent nothing but the new value of Gs., created 
during the 12 hours' spinning process. All the value trans- 
ferred to those 4 lbs , from the raw material and instruments 
of labour consumed, was, so to say, intercepted in order to be 
incorporated in the 16 lbs. first spun. In this case, it is as if 
the spinner had spun 4 lbs. of yarn out of air, or, as if he had 
spun them with the aid of cotton and spindles, that, being the 
spontaneous gift of Nature, transferred no value to the product. 

Of this 4 lbs. of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly 
created during the process, is condensed, one half represents 
tlw: equivalent for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. 
variable capital, the other half represents the 3s. surplus-value. 

Since 12 working hours of the spinner are embodied in Gs., 
it follows that in yarn of the value of 30s., there must be em- 
bodied 00 working hours. And this quantity of labour-time 
does in fact exist in the 20 lbs. of yarn ; for in ^ths or 1G lbs. 
there are materialised the 48 hours of labour expended, before 
the commencement of the spinning process, on the means of 
production ; and in the remaining £ths or 4 lbs. there are 
materialised the 12 hours' work done during the process itself 

On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn 18 equal 
t 1 tin- Bum of the new value created during the production of 
that yarn plus the value previously existing in the means of 
producl i<»n. 

It has now been shown how the various component parts of 
tin- value of tie- product, parts that differ functionally from 
each other, may be represented by corresponding proportional 
parts of t he product itself. 

To split up in this manner the product into different parts, 

of which one represents only the labour previously spent on 

the means of production, or the constant capital, another, only 
the necessary labour spent during the process of production, or 
the variable capital, and another and Last part, only the surplus- 



206 Capitalist Production. 

labour expended daring the same process, or the surplus-value ; 
to do this, is, as will be seen later on from its application to 
complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no less impor- 
tant than it is simple. 

In the preceding investigation we have treated the total 
product as the final result, ready for use, of a working day of 
12 hours. We can how r ever follow this total product through 
all the stages of its production ; and in this way we shall 
arrive at the same result as before, if we represent the partial 
products, given off at the different stages, as functionally 
different parts of the final or total product. 

The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. of yarn, or in 1 
hour 1| lbs. ; consequently he produces in 8 hours 13 \ lbs., or 
a partial product equal in value to all the cotton that is spun 
in a whole day. In like manner the partial product of the 
next period of 1 hour and 36 minutes, is 2| lbs. of yarn : this 
represents the value of the instruments of labour that are con- 
sumed in 12 hours. In the following hour and 12 minutes, 
the spinner produces 2 lbs. of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value 
equal to the whole value he creates in his 6 hours necessary 
labour. Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces 
another 2 lbs. of yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus- 
value, created by his surplus-labour during half a day. This 
method of calculation serves the English manufacturer for 
everyday use ; it shows, he will say, that in the first 8 hours, 
or -§ of the working day, he gets back the value of his cotton ; 
and so on for the remaining hours. It is also a perfectly 
correct method : being in fact the first method given above 
with this difference, that instead of being applied to space, in 
which the different parts of the completed product lie side by 
side, it deals with time, in which those parts are successively 
produced. But it can also be accompanied by very barbarian 
notions, more especially in the heads of those who are as much 
interested, practically, in the process of making value beget 
value, as they are in misunderstanding that process theoreti- 
cally. Such people may get the notion into their heads, that 
our spinner, for example, produces or replaces in the first 8 
hours of his working day the value of the cotton ; in the 



The Rate of Surplus -value. 207 

following hour and 36 minutes the value of the instruments of 
labour worn away; in the next hour and 12 minutes the valve 
of the wages ; and that he devotes to the production of surplus- 
value for the manufacturer, only that well known "last hour." 
In this way the poor spinner is made to perform the two-fold 
miracle not only of producing cotton, spindles, steam-engine, 
coal, oil, &c, at the same time that he spins with them, but 
also of turning one working day into five ; for, in the example 
we are considering, the production of the raw material and instru- 
ments of labour demands four working days of twelve hours 
each, and their conversion into yarn requires another such day. 
That the love of lucre induces an easy belief in such miracles, 
and that sycophant doctrinaires are never wanting to prove 
them, is vouched for by the following incident of historical 
celebrity. 

SK< TION 3. — SENIOR'S " LAST HOUR." 

One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. Senior, who 
may be called the bel-esprit of English economists, well known, 
alike for his economical " science," and for his beautiful style, 
was summoned from Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the 
latter place, the political economy that he taught in the former. 
Phe manufacturers elected him as their champion, not only 
against the newly passed Factory Act, but against the still 
more menacing Ten-hours' agitation. \\ ith their usual practical 
acuteness, they had found out that the learned Professor 
"wanted a good deal of finishing ; " it was this discovery that 
I them to write for him. On his side the Professor has 
embodied the lecture he received from the Manchester manu- 
facturers, in a pamphlet, entitled: "Letters on the Factory 
Act, as it affects the cotton manufacture/ 1 London, 1837. 
Here we tind, amongst others, the following edifying pasaage: 
"1 uder the present law, no mill in which persona under 18 

years of age are employed can be worked m 

than UJ hours a day, that is, 1- hours for 5 days in the week, 
and nine on Saturday. 

"Now the following analyaia (!) will show that in 1 mill 



2o8 Capitalist Production. 

worked, the whole net profit is derived from the last hour. I 
will suppose a manufacturer to invest £100,000: — £80,0<H) m 
his mill and machinery, and £20,000 in raw material and wages. 
The annual return of that mill, supposing the capital to be 
turned once a year, and gross profits to be 15 per cent, ought 

to be goods worth £115,000 Of this £115,000, 

each of the twenty-three half-hours of work produces 5-ll.jths 
or one twenty-third. Of these 23-23rds (constituting the whole 
£115,000) twenty, that is to say £100,000 out of the £115,000, 
simply replace the capital ; — one twenty-third (or £5000 out 
of the £115,000) makes up for the deterioration of the mill and 
machinery. The remaining 2-23rds, that is, the last two of the 
twenty-three half-hours of every day, produce the net profit of 
10 per cent. If, therefore (prices remaining the same), the 
factory could be kept at work thirteen hours instead of eleven 
and a half, with an addition of about £2600 to the circulating 
capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. On the 
other hand, if the hours of working were reduced by one hour 
per day (prices remaining the same), the net profit would be 
destroyed — if they were reduced by one hour and a half, even 
the gross profit would be destroyed." 1 

1 Senior, 1. c, p. 12, 13. We let pass such extraordinary notions as are of no im- 
portance for our purpose ; for instance, the assertion, that manufacturers reckon as 
part of their profit, gross or net, the amount required to make good wear and tear of 
machinery, or in other words, to replace a part of the capital. So. too, we pass over 
any question as to the accuracy of his figures. Leonard Horner has shown in "A 
Letter to Mr. Senior," &c, London, 1837, that they are worth no more than the so- 
called " Analysis." Leonard Horner was one of the Factory Inquiry Commissioners 
in 1833, and Inspector, or rather Censor of Factories till 1859. He rendered undying 
service to the English working class. He carried on a life-long contest, not only 
with the embittered manufacturers, but also with the Cabinet, to whom the number 
of votes given by the masters in the Lower House, was a matter of far greater impor- 
tance than the number of hours worked by the " hands n in the mills. 

Apart from errors in principle, Senior's statement is confused. What he really in- 
tended to say was this : The manufacturer employs the workman for HA hours or for 
23 half-hours daily. As the working day, so, too, the working year, may be conceived 
to consist of 11.^ hours or 23 half-hours, but each multiplied by the number of working 
days in the year. On this supposition, the 23 half-hours yield an annual product of 
£115,000; one half-hour yields ^ x £115,000; 20 half-hours yield \% x £115,000; 
= £100,000, i.e., they replace no more than the capital advanced. There remain 3 half- 
hours, which yield .? A x £115,000 = £15,000 or the gross profit. Of these 3 half-hours, one 
yields ft x £115,000 = £5000 ; i.e., it makes up for the wear and tear of the 
machinery ; the remaining 2 half-hours, i.e., the last hour, yield ft x £115,000 = 
l'10,000 or the net profit. In the text Senior converts the last ft of the product intt 
portions of the working day itself. 



The Rate of Surplus-value. 209 

And the professor calls this an "analysis!" If, giving 
credence to the out-cries of the manufacturers, he believed that 
the workmen spend the best part of the day in the production, 
i.e., the reproduction or replacement of the value of the build- 
ings, machinery, cotton, coal, &c, then his analysis was super- 
fluous. His answer would simply have been : — Gentlemen ! 
if you work your mills for 10 hours instead of 11 \, then, other 
things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton, machinery, 
&c., will decrease in proportion. You gain just as much as 
vou lose. Your work-people will in future spend one hour 
and a half less time in reproducing or replacing the capital 
that has been advanced. — If, on the other hand, he did not 
believe them without further inquiry, but, as being an expert 
in such matters, deemed an analysis necessary, then he ought, 
in a question that is concerned exclusively with the relations 
of net profit to the length of the working day, before all things 
to have asked the manufacturers, to be careful not to lump 
•ther machinery, workshops, raw material, and labour, but 
to be good enough to place the constant capital, invested in 
buildings, machinery, raw material, &:c., on one side of the 
unt, and the capital advanced in wages on the other side. 
If tli. • professor then found, that in accordance with the calcu- 
lation of the manufacturers, the workman reproduced or re- 
placed his wages in - hall-hours, in that case, he should have 
continued his analysis thus : 

According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but 

me produces his wages, and in the last hour your surplus- 

ralue or net profit. Now, since in equal periods he produces 

qual values, the produce of the last hour but one, must have 

he same value as that of the last hour. Further, it is only 

srhile he labours thai he produces any value at all. anil the 

unounl of his labour is measured by his labour-time. This 

irou say, amounts to LI J hours a day. lb* employs one portion 

»f t he ■•■ 1 1 \ hours, in producing or replacing his wages, and the 

emaining portion in producing your net profit Beyond this he 

llocs absolutely nothing. But since, on your assumption, his 

and the surplus value he yields, are of equal value 

ear that he produces his wages in 5] hours, and your 





210 Capitalist Production. 

profit in the other 5^ hours. Again, since the value of th 
yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal to the sum of the values o 
bis wages and of your net profit, the measure of the value o 
this yarn must be 11J working hours, of which 5J hour 
measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour bu 
one, and 5J, the value of the yarn produced in the last houi 
We now come to a ticklish point ; therefore, attention ! Th 
last working hour but one is, like the first, an ordinary workin; 
hour, neither more nor less. How then can the spinner pro 
duce in one hour, in the shape of yarn, a value that embodie 
5f hours labour ? The truth is that he performs no sue] 
miracle. The use- value produced by him in one hour, is | 
definite quantity of yarn. The value of this yarn is measure* 
by 5| working hours, of which 4J were, without any assistanc 
from him, previously embodied in the means of production, ii 
the cotton, the machinery, and so on ; the remaining one hou 
alone is added by him. Therefore since his wages are produce* 
in 5 j hours, and the yarn produced in one hour also contain 
5 j hours' work, there is no witchcraft in the result, that th 
value created by his of hours' spinning, is equal to the value o 
the product spun in one hour. You are altogether on th 
wrong track, if you think that he loses a single moment of hi 
working day, in reproducing or replacing the values of th 
cotton, the machinery, and so on. On the contrary, it is be 
cause his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yan 
because he spins, that the values of the cotton and spindles g 
over to the yarn of their ovvn accord. This result is owing t 
the quality of his labour, not to its quantity. It is true, h 
will in one hour transfer to the yarn more value, in the sha| 
of cotton, than he will in half an hour ; but that is only he 
cause in one hour he spins up more cotton than in half a 
hour. You see then, your assertion, that the workman pre 
duces, in the last hour but one, the value of his wages, and i 
the last hour your net profit, amounts to no more than thi 
that in the yarn produced by him in 2 working hours, whethf 
they are the 2 first or the 2 last hours of the working day, i 
that yarn, there are incorporated 111 working hours, or just 
whole day's work, i.e., two hours of his own work and 9i houi 



T/ie Rale of Surplus-value. 2 1 1 

of other people's. And my assertion that, in the first 04 hours, 
he produces his wages, and in the last of hours your net profit, 
amounts only te this, that you pay him for the former, but not 
for the latter. In speaking of payment of labour, instead of 
payment of labour-power, I only talk your own slang. Now, 
gentlemen, if you compare the working time you pay for, with 
that which you do not pay for, you will find that they are to 
one another, as half a day is to half a day ; this gives a rate of 
100%, and a very pretty percentage it is. Further, there is 
not the least doubt, that if you make your " hands " toil for 1*> 
tours, instead of 11 J, and, as may be expected from you, treat 
the work done in that extra one hour and a half, as pure 
surplus-labour, then the latter will be increased from 5J hours' 
sbour to 7] hours' labour, and the rate of surplus-value from 
100 to 126 ^ %. So that you are altogether too sanguine, in 
expecting that by such an addition of 1£ hours to the working 
lay, the rate will rise from 100% to 200% and more, in other 
words that it will be "more than doubled." On the other 
land— man's heart is a wonderful thing, especially when 
arried in the purse — you take too pessimist a view, when you 
ear, that with a reduction of the hours of labour from 11! t<> 
10, the whole of your net profit will go to the dogs. Not at 
ill. All other conditions remaining the same, the Burplufr- 
abour will fall from 5J hours to 4jJ hours, a period that still 
pves a very profitable rate of surplus-value, namely 82JJ 
lot tins dreadful " last hour," about which you have invented 
uore stories than have the millenarians about the day of 
udgment, is "all bosh." If it goes, it will cost neither you, 
one net profit, nor the boys and girls whom you employ, their 

purity of mind." 1 Whenever your M las1 hour - ' strikes in 

'If, on the one band, Senior proved that the net profit of the manafeoturer, 
ceofthe English cotton industry, and England^ ooratnand of the marketi 
P the world, depend on "the last working hour," on tin- otbei band, Dr. Audio* 
m ihowed, tii.it if (in id 1 en and young persons umltT 18 years of ago, Instead of being 
■pi the full 12 houn in the warm and pore mora] aiioosphere of the faoiorj, are 
mod out an hour sooner into the heartless and frivolous outer world, they orill bt 
■ prired, by Idleness and vice, of all hope <»f salvation for tin li souls, su.. • I s W 

pectors bave nevei tired of twitting the master! with this " last," thii 
fatal hour." 'I'Iuih Mr. Bowel] m bis report of the Slat May i • ■ ■ "Had the foUoo 
-■ mioui calculation (he quotes Senior) been oorreot, ererj ootton fsv fcorj I the 
oited Kingdom would hate boon working at a loot afoot Iheyeai 



2 1 2 Capitalist Production. 

earnest, think on the Oxford Professor. And now, gentlemai 
" farewell, and may we meet again in yonder better world, bi 
not before." 

Senior invented the battle cry of the " last hour" in 183C 

of the Insp. of Fact, for the half-year, ending 30th April, 1855, pp. 19, 20.) la tl 
year 1848, after the passing of the 10 hour's bill, the masters of some flax spinnii 
mills, scattered, few and far between, over the country on the borders of Dorset ar 
Somerset, foisted a petition against the bill on to the shoulders of a few of their woi 
people. One of the clauses of this petition is as follows: "Your petitioners, 
parents, conceive that an additional hour of leisure will tend more to demoralise tl 
children than otherwise, believing that idleness is the parent of vice." On this tl 
factory report of 31st Oct., 1848, says : The atmosphere of the flax mills, in which tl 
children of these virtuous and tender parents work, is so loaded with dust and fib 
from the raw material, that it is exceptionally unpleasant to stand even 10 minutes 
the spinning rooms : for you are unable to do so without the most painful sensatio 
owing to the eyes, the ears, the nostrils, and mouth, being immediately filled by t) 
clouds of flax dust from which there is no escape. The labour itself, owing to tl 
feverish haste of the machinery, demands unceasing application of skill and movemen 
under the control of a watchfulness that never tires, and it seems somewhat hard, 
let parents apply the term "idling" to their own children, who, after allowing f 
meal times, are fettered for 10 whole hours to such an occupation, in such an atmc 
phere. . . . These children work longer than the labourers in the neighbourii 

villages Such cruel talk about " idleness and vice " ought to I 

branded as the purest cant, and the most shameless hypocrisy Th 

portion of the public, who, about 12 years ago, were struck by the assurance wii 
which, under the sanction of high authority, it was publicly and most earnestly pr 
claimed, that the whole net profit of the manufacturer flows from the labour of tl 
last hour, and that, therefore, the reduction of the working day by one hour, wou 
destroy his net profit , that portion of the public, we say, will hardly believe its ov 
eyes, when it now finds, that the original discovery of the virtues of " the last houi 
has si ce been so far improved, as to include morals as well as profit ; so that, if ti 
duration of the labour of children, is reduced to a full 10 hours, their morals, togeth 
with the net profits of their employers, will vanish, both being dependent on thia Iril 
this fatal hour. (See Repts., Insp. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1848, p. 101.) The aar 
report then gives some examples of the morality and virtue of these^same pure-mini 
manufacturers, of the tricks, the artifices, the cajoling, the threats, and the falsific 
tions, they made use of, in order, first, to compel a few defenceless workmen to si: 
petitions of such a kind, and then to impose them upon Parliament as the petitii 
of a whole branch of industry, or a whole country. It is highly characteristic of t 
present status of so called economical science, that neither Senior himself, who, a 
later period, to his honour be it said, energetically supported the factory legislatk 
nor his opponents, from first to last, have ever been able to explain the false II 
elusions of the " original discovery." They appeal to actual experience, but the w 
and wherefore remains a mystery. 

1 Nevertheless, the learned professor was not without some benefit from his journ 
to Manchester. In the " Letters on the Factory Act," he makes the whole net gai 
including " profit " and " interest, "and even "something more," depend upon I sirn: 
unpaid hour's work of the labourer. One year previously, in his "Outlines of Politk 
Economy," written for the instruction of Oxford students and cultivated l'hilistim 
he had also " discovered, in opposition to Kicardo's determination of value by la-M 
that profit is derived from the labour of the capitalist, and interest from hisasectich 



The Rate of Surplus-value. 2 1 3 

n the London Economist of the 15th April, 1848, the same cry 
/as again raised by James Wilson, an economical mandarin of 
igh standing: this time in opposition to the 10 hours' bill. 

SECTION 4. — SURPLUS-PRODUCE. 

The portion of the product that represents the surplus-value, 
me-tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. of } T arn, in the example given 
1 Sec. 2.) we call " surplus-produce." Just as the rate of 
jrplus- value is determined by its relation, not to the sum total 
f the capital, but to its variable part ; in like manner, the re- 
itive quantity of surplus-produce is determined by the ratio 
iat this produce bears, not to the remaining part of the total 
roduct, but to that part of it in which is incorporated the 
ssary labour. Since the production of surplus-value is th<- 
defend and aim of capitalist production, it is clear, that the 
reatness of a man s or a nation's wealth should be measured. 
ot by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative 
lagnitude of the surplus-produce. 1 

The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour, i.e., 
P tin: periods of time during which the workman replaces the 
aloe of his labour-power, and produces the surplus-value, this 
in constitutes the actual time during which he works, i.e., the 
orking day. 

other words, from his "abstinence." The dodge was an old one, hut the word 
abstinence' was new. Hen Roschertrar slates it rightly by" Entbaltung." Some of 
1 countrymen, the Browns, Jones, and Robinsons, of Germany, not m> well vw 
Latin as he, have, monk like, rendered it hy " Bntaagung " (renunciation). 
1 "To an individual with a capital <>f £20,000, whose profits were £2000 per annum, 
would !>•• u mattei quite indifferent whether hi* capital would employ • 100 or 1000 

!i, whether the commodity produced hold for £'10,000 or £'U0,0OO, provided, in all 

•es, liin profit were not diminished below £2000, [snot the real interest of the nation 

r? Provided its net real income, iti rent and profits, be the same, it is of no 

ince win tin i the nation consists of 10 or of L2 millions of inhabitants. M (B 

416.) I. »re Ricardo, arthui Young, ■ fanatical upholder of surplus 

'"luce, foi tip rest, a rambling, uncritical writer, whose reputation is in the inverse 

il Ins merit, Hays, "of whal use, in s modern kingdom, would bee whole j 

'mis divided [in tin- old Roman manner, by small independent praaanti |,how< Mr 

•II cultivated, except for the m< r« purpose of breeding men, whiofa taki n ingl] is i 

ai useless purpose?" (Arthur Young: Political arithmetic, fee. London, 1771. 

curious is " i tion . . . tor net wealth ae beneficial to 

i labouring olass .... though it is evidently not on aooount of bein| net 
pains, On Kent of Land, \c London, 1828, p. 126.) 



2 r 4 Capitalist Production. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE WORKING DAY. 
SECTION 1. — THE LIMITS OF THE WORKING DAY. 

We started with the supposition that labour-power is bougt 
and sold at its value. Its value, like that of all other comm 
dities, is determined by the working time necessary to i 
production. If the production of the average daily means « 
subsistence of the labourer takes up 6 hours, he must work, c 
the average, G hours every day, to produce his daily labou 
power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of i 
sale. The necessary part of his working day amounts to 
hours, and is, therefore, cceteris paribus, a given quantity. Bi 
with this, the extent of the working day itself is not y< 
given. 

Let us assume that the line A B represents the length of tl 
necessary working time, say 6 hours. If the labour be pr 
longed 1, 3, or 6 hours beyond A B, we have 3 other line 

Working day I. Working day II. Working day II 

A B— 0. A B C. A B Q 

representing 3 different working days of 7, 9, and 12 hong 
The extension B C of the line A B represents the length 
the surplus labour. As the working day is A B-i-B C 
A C, it varies with the variable quantity B C. Since A 
is constant, the ratio of B C to A B can always be calculate 
In working day I. it is J, in working day II, -| in working da 
111,4 of A B. Since, further, the ratio gg g» wor "°* M rv dete 

> 6 T » uecussary working time, 

mines the rate of the surplus-value, the latter is given by tl 
ratio of B C to A B. It amounts in the 3 different worki 
days respectively to 16 J, 50 and 100 per cent. On the oth 
hand, the rate of surplus-value alone would not give us tl 
extent of the working day. If this rate, e.g., were 100 p 
cent., the working day might be of 8, 10, 12, or more houi 
It would indicate that the 2 constituent parts of the workil 



The Working Day. 215 

day, necessary-labour and surplus-labour time, were equal in ex- 
tent, but not how long each of these two constituent parts was. 

The working day is thus not a constant, but a variable 
quantity. One of its parts, certainly, is determined by the 
working time required for the reproduction of the labour- 
power of the labourer himself. But its total amount varies 
with the duration of the surplus-labour. The working day is, 
therefore, determinable, but is, per se, indeterminate. ' 

Although the working day is not a fixed, but a fluent 
quantity, it can, on the other hand, only vary within certain 
limits. The minimum limit is, however, not determinable ; 
of course, if we make the extension line BC or the surplus- 
labour = 0, we have a minimum limit, ie. y the part of the day 
which the labourer must necessarily work for his own main- 
tenance. On the basis of capitalist production, however, this 
necessary labour can form a part only of the working day ; the 
working day itself can never be reduced to this minimum. On 
the other hand, the working day has a maximum limit. It 
annot be prolonged beyond a certain point. This maximum 
limit is conditioned by two things. First, by the physical 
hounds of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of the natural day 
a man can expend only a definite quantity of his vital force. A 
horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours. 
During part of the day this force must rest, sleep ; during 
another part the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to 
feed, wash, and clothe himself. Besides these purely physical 
limitations, the extension of the working day encounter* 
moral ones. The labourer needs time for satisfying his intellec- 
tual and social wants, the extent and number of which are 
conditioned by the general state of social advancement. The 
variation of the working day fluctuates, therefore, within 
physical and social bounds. But both these Limiting conditions 
are of a very elastic nature, and allow the greatest latitude. 
80 we find working days of 8, 10, 12, L4, 16, 18 hours, /.<., of 
the most different length . 

The capitalist has bought the labour-power at ltd day rate. 

1 " A iI.iv'h labour iH rtgUt, i( may bs lofJg or slmrt." (" An M ..iy Ml Iik'. nm\ 

1 tomnx i« 1 containing observations on laut»"Jfo Lund on, 177", p. 7^.) 



2 1 6 Capitalist Production. 

To him its use-value belongs during one working day. He 
has thus acquired the right to make the labourer work tor him 
during one day. But, what is a working day ? 

At all events, less than a natural day. By how much ? 
The capitalist has his own views of this ultima Thule, the 
necessary limit of the working day. As capitalist, he is only 
capital personified. His soul is the soul of capital. But 
capital has one single life impulse, the tendency to create 
value and surplus-value, to make its constant factor, the means 
of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of surplus- 
labour. 8 

Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by 
sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it 
sucks. The time during which the labourer works, is the time 
during which the capitalist consumes the labour-power he has 
purchased of him. 3 

If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he 
robs the capitalist. 

The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the ex- 
change of commodities. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get 
the greatest possible benefit out of the use-value of his commo- 
dity. Suddenly the voice of the labourer, which had been 
stifled in the storm and stress of the process of production, 
rises : 

The commodity that 1 have sold to you differs from the 
crowd of other commodities, in that its use creates value, and 

i Tins question is far more important than the celebrated question of Sir Robert 
Peel to the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce : What is a pound? A question 
that could only have been proposed, because Peel was as much in the dark as to tin 
nature of money as the " little shilling men " of Birmingham. 

2 It is the aim of the capitalist to obtain with his expended capital the greater 
possible quantity of labour (d'obtenir du capital depense la plus forte somine dfl 
travail possible.) J. G. Courcelle-Seneuil. Traite theorique et pratique des entro 
prises industriellcs. 2nd ed. Paris, 1857, p. 63. 

3 "An hour's labour lost in a day is a prodigious injury to a commercial State. 
. . . There is a very great consumption of luxuries among the labouring poor of this 
kingdom : particularly among the manufacturing populace, by which they ftllO 
consume their time, the most fatal of consumptions. " An Essay on Trade ami 
Commerce, &c, p. 47 and 153. 

4 "Si le manouvrier libra prend un instant de repos,reconomie sordidequi le suit 
des yeux avec inquietude, pretend qu'il la vole.'' N. Linguet. " Theorie des loi 
civiles, &c. London, 1707," t. II., p. 400. 



The Working Day. 2 1 7 

a value greater than its own. That is why you bought it. 
That which on your side appears a spontaneous expansion of 
capital, is on mine extra expenditure of labour-power. You 
and I know on the market only one law, that of the exchange 
of commodities. And the consumption of the commodity 
belongs not to the seller who parts with it, but to the buyer, 
who acquiies it. To you, therefore, belongs the use of my 
daily labour-power. But by means of the price that you pay 
for it each day, I must be able to reproduce it daily, and to 
sell it again. Apart from natural exhaustion through age, &C, 
I must be able on the morrow to work with the same normal 
amount of force, health and freshness as to-day. You preach 
to me constantly the gospel of "saving" and "abstinence." 
Good! I will, like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole 
ilth, labour-power, and abstain from all foolish waste of it. 
I will each day spend, set in motion, put into action only as 
much of it as is compatible with its normal duration, and 
healthy development. By an unlimited extension of the 
working day, you may in one day use up a quantity of labour- 
power greater than 1 can restore in three. What you gain in 
labour I lose in substance. The use of my labour-power and 

spoliation of it are quite different things. If the average 
time that (doing a reasonable amount of work) an aver;. 
labourer can live, is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, 
which you pay me from <lay today is . M .. 1 x:t0 or -L- of its total 
value. But if you consume it in 10 years, you pay me daily 

instead ol of its total value, i.e., only \ of it* daily 
value, and y-m rob me, therefore, every day <>t' 5 of the value of 
my commodity. Sou pay me for one day's labour-power, 
whilst you use that of 3 days. That is againsl our contract 
and the law of exchanges, I demand, therefore, a working 
day of normal length, and I demand it without any appeal to 
your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place 
\ "U in.i\ be a model citizen, perhaps a member of the 

ty for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in th< 
odour of sanctity to boot; but the thing that you represent fa 

ce with me has no heart in its breast. That which scene 
to thr.»b there is m\ own heart-beating. 1 demand the normal 



2 1 8 Capitalist Production. 

working clay because I, like every other seller, demand the 
value of my commodity. ' 

We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, tho 
nature of the exchange of commodities itself imposes no limit to 
the working day, no limit to surplus-labour. The capitalist main- 
tains his rights as a purchaser when he tries to make the work- 
ing day as long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two 
working days out of one. On the other hand, the peculiar 
nature of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consump- 
tion by the purchaser, and the labourer maintains his ri^lit 
as seller when he wishes to reduce the working day to one of 
definite normal duration. There is here, therefore, an anti- 
nomy, right against right, both equally bearing the seal of the 
law of exchanges. Between equal rights force decides. Hence 
is it that in the history of capitalist production, the determin- 
ation of what is a working day, presents itself as the result of 
a struggle, a struggle between collective capital, i.e., the class of 
capitalists, and collective labour, i.e., the working class. 

SECTION 2. —THE GREED FOR SURPLUS-LABOUR. MANUFACTURER AND BOYARD. 

Capital has not invented surplus-labour. Wherever a part 
of society possesses the monopoly of the means of production, the 
labourer, free or not free, must add to the working time 
necessary for his own maintenance an extra working time in 
order to produce the means of subsistence for the owners of the 
means of production, 2 whether this proprietor be the Athenian 
kolxIs K*yadoi, Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus, Norman baron, 
American slave owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or 
capitalist, 3 It is, however, clear that in any given economic 

1 During the great strike of the London builders, 1S60-61, for the reduction of th» 
working day to 1) hours, their Committee published a manifesto that contained, t. 
some extent, the plea of our worker. The manifesto alludes, not without irony, U 
the fact, that the greatest profit-monger amongst the building masters, a certail 
Sir M. Peto, was in the odour of sanctity. (This same Peto, after 1807, came to an 
end a la Btrousberg.) 

2 "Those who labour .... in reality feed both the pensioners . . . [called 
the rich] and themselves." (Edmund Burke, 1. c, p. 2.) 

•' Nlebuhr in nil " Roman History" says very naively : "It is evident that works 
like the Etruscan, which, in their ruins astound us, presuppose in little (!) states lords 
and vassals." Sismondi says far more to the purpose that "Brussels lace" pre 
supposes wage lords and wage-slaves. 



The Working Day. 219 

formation of society, where not the exchange- value but the 
use-value of the product predominates, surplus-labour will be 
limited by a given set of wants which may be greater or less, 
and that here no boundless thirst for surplus-labour arises from 
the nature of the production itself. Hence in antiquity over- 
work becomes horrible only when the object is to obtain ex- 
change-value in its specific independent money-form ; in the 
production of gold and silver. Compulsory working to death 
is here the recognised form of over-woife. Only read Diodorus 
Biculus. 1 Still these are exceptions in antiquity. But as soon 
as people, whose production still moves within the lower forms 
of slave-labour, corveVlabour, &c.,are drawn into the whirlpool 
of an international market dominated by the capitalistic mode 
of production, the sale of their products for export becoming 
their principal interest, the civilized horrors of over-work are 
grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &c. Hence 
the negro labour in the Southern States of the American Union 
preserved something of a patriarchal character, so long as pro- 
duction was chiefly directed to immediate local consumption. 
But in proportion, as the export of cotton became of vital 
interest to these states, the over-working of thene<noand some- 
times the using up of his life in 7 years' of labour became a 
factor in a calculated and calculating system. It was no longer 
a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of useful 
products. It was now a question of production of surplus- 
labour itself. So was it also with the corvee, e.<j. t in the 
Danubian Principalities (now Roumania). 

The comparison of the greed for surplus-labour in the 
Danubian Principalities with the same greed in English factories 
has a special interest, because surplus-labour in the corvee has 
an independenl and palpable form. 

Suppose the working day consists of <J hours of necessary 
labour, and 6 hours of surplus-labour. Then the free labourer 

1 " < >m- ( .itiimt hi ■■ Mi. ■-,•• imforhin.iti fl (m tin- gold miiih-s t«< t \\ ■ ■ n I I Ethiopia, 

.khI Arabia) wrho 1 innot eTen havt thaii bodiea olaaa, "i thtii oakedneu olothed, 
witlii.ut j. 11 miserable lot. Than til do indulgenoe, no forbearanoi fot thi 

the feeble, the fcgeil, for woman'N wcakiu-nH. All matt, fofood 03 blows, work 
on until death pnti an «i><1 to thaii •oiftfiogi and tli> li diita ■•■-. y" Diod Si< BibL 
Dial . lib, 8, 13.) 



220 Capitalist Production. 

gives the capitalist every week G x Cor 30 hours of surplus- 
labour. It is the same as if he worked 3 days in the week for 
himself, and 3 days in the week gratis for the capitalist. But 
this is not evident on the surface. Surplus-labour and nceessarv 
labour glide one into the other. I can, therefore, express the 
same relationship by saying, e.g., that the labourer in every 
minute works 30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist, 
etc. It is otherwise with the corve'e. The necessary labour 
which the Wailachian peasant does for his own maintenance i- 
distinctly marked off from his surplus-labour on behalf of the 
Boyard. The one he does on his own field, the other on the 
seignorial estate. Both parts of the labour-time exist, there- 
fore, independently, side by side one with the other. In the 
corvee the surplus-labour is accurately marked off from the 
necessary labour. This, however, can make no difference with 
regard to the quantitative relation of surplus-labour to necessary 
labour. Three clays' surplus-labour in the week remain three 
days that yield no equivalent to the labourer himself, whether 
it be called corvee or wage-labour. But in the capitalist the 
greed for surplus-labour appears in the straining after an un- 
limited extension of the working day, in the Boyard more 
simply in a direct hunting after days of corvee. 1 

In the Danubian Principalities the corve'e was mixed up with 
rents in kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but it formed 
the most important tribute paid to the ruling class. Where 
this was the case, the corve'e rarely arose from serfdom ; serfdom 
much more frequently on the other hand took origin from the 
corvee. 2 This is what took place in the Roumanian provinces. 

1 That which follows refers to the situation in the Roumanian provinces before the 
change effected since the Crimean war. 

2 This holds likewise for Germany, and especially for Prussia east of the Elbe. In 
the 15th century the German peasant was nearly everywhere a man, who, whilst 
snbject to certain rents paid in produce and labour was otherwise at least 
practically free. The German colonists in Brandenburg, Pomerania. Silesia, and 
Eastern Prussia, were even legally acknowledged as free men. The victory of the 
nobility in the peasants 1 war put an end to that. Not only were the conquered South 
German peasants again enslaved. From the middle of the Kith century the peasants 
of Eastern Prussia, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Silesia, and soon after the free 
peasants of Schleswig-IIolstein were degraded to the condition of serfs. (Maurer, 
Fronh5fe iv. vol ,— Meitzea, der Boden des preussischen Staats. — Hansen, 
Leibeigenschaft in Se-hloswig-Holstein. — Ed.) 



The Working Day. 221 

Their original mode of production was based on community of 
the soil, but not in the Slavonic or Indian form. Part of the 
land was cultivated in severalty as freehold by the members of 
the community, another part — ager publicus — was cultivated 
by them in common. The products of this common labour 
served partly as a reserve fund against bad harvests and other 
accidents, partly as a public store for providing the costs of 
war, religion, and other common expenses. In course of time 
military and clerical dignitaries usurped, along with the com- 
mon land, the labour spent upon it. The labour of the free 
p lasants on their common land was transformed into corvee for 
tin- thieves of the common land. This corve'e soon developed 
into a servile relationship existing in point of fact, not in point 
of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal 
under pretence of abolishing serfdom. The code of the corvee, 
which the Russian General Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of 
course dictated by the Boyards themselves. Thus Russia con- 
quered with one blow the magnates of the Danubian provinces, 
and the applause of liberal cretins throughout Europe. 

According to the ,l Eleglement organique," as this code of the 
corve'e is called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the so-called 
landlord, besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: (1), 12 
days of general labour; (2), one day of field labour; (3), one 
day of wood carrying. In all, 14 days in the year. With deep 
insight into political economy, however, the working day is not 
taken in its ordinary sense, but as the working day necessary 
to the production of an average daily product ; and that avei 
daily product is determined in so crafty a way thai no ( Syclopa 
would be done with it in 24 hours. In dry words, the Regle- 
ment itself declares with true Russian irony that by 1 - working 
days one must understand the product of the manual Labour of 
S6 days, by l day of field labour 3 days, and by 1 day of wood 
carrying in Like manner three times as much. In all, 4£ 
oorvee days. To this had to be added the so-called jobagie, 
ice due to the lord i"<>r extraordinary occasions. In projXHv 
tion to the size of its population, every village has t.» furnish 
annually a definite contingent to the job This additional 

estimated at 11- days for each Wallachian peasant 



222 Capitalist Production. 

Thus the prescribed corvee amounts to 50 working days yearly. 
But the agricultural year in Wallachia numbers in consequence 
of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 40 for Sundays 
and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, together 70 
days, do not count. 1-10 working days remain. The ratio <>f 
the corve'e to the necessary labour j£ or 66 | °/ gives a much 
smaller rate of surplus- value than that which regulates the 
labour of the English agricultural or factory labourer. This 
is, however, only the legally prescribed corvee. And in a spirit 
yet more " liberal " than the English Factory Acts, the " Regle- 
ment organique " has known how to facilitate its own evasion. 
After it has made 56 days out of 1 2, the nominal days work of 
each of the 56 corvee days is again so arranged that a portion 
of it must fall on the ensuing day. In one day, e.g., must be 
weeded an extent of land, which, for this work, especially in 
maize plantations, needs twice as much time. The legal days 
work for some kinds of agricultural labour is interpretable in 
such a way that the day begins in May and ends in October. 
In Moldavia conditions are still harder. " The 12 corvee days 
of the ' Reglement organique' cried a Boyard drunk with 
victory, amount to 365 days in the year." 1 

If the Reglement organique of the Danubian provinces was 
a positive expression of the greed for surplus-labour which 
every paragraph legalised, the English Factory Acts are the 
negative expression of the same greed. These acts curb the 
passion of capital for a limitless draining of labour-power, by 
forcibly limiting the working day by state regulations, made 
by a state that is ruled by capitalist and landlord. Apart from 
the working-class movement that daily grew more threatening, 
the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity 
which spread guano over the English fields. The same blind 
eagerness for plunder that in the one case exhausted the soil, 
had, in the other, torn up by the roots the living force of t lu- 
nation. Periodical epidemics speak on this point as clearly a> 
the diminishing military standard in Germany and France. 2 

1 Further details are to be found in E. Regnault's " Histoire politique et sociale des 
Principautes Danubiennes Paiis, 1855 

2 " In general and within certain limits, exceeding the medium size of their kind, ii 
evidence of the prosperity of organic beings. As to man, his bodily height lessens if 



The Working Day. 223 

The Factory Act of 1850 now in force (18G7) allows for the 
average working-day 10 hours, i.e.,iov the first 5 days 12 hours 
from G a.ra. to 6 p.m., including \ an hour for breakfast, and 
an hour for dinner, and thus leaving 10J working hours, and 
8 hours for Saturday, from G a.m. to 2 p.m., of which \ an hour 
is subtracted for breakfast. GO working hours are left, 10-J for 
each of the first 5 days, 7J for the last. 1 Certain guardians of 
these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors, directly under the 
Home Secretary, whose reports are published half-yearly, by 
order of Parliament. They give regular and official statistics of 
the capitalistic greed for surplus-labour. 

Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors.* 
" The fraudulent millowner begins work a quarter of an hour 
'sometimes more, sometimes less) before 6 a.m., and leaves off 
a quarter of an hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 
G p.m. He takes 5 minutes from the beginning and from the 

I it due growth is interfered with, either hy physical or social conditions. In all 
European countries in which the conscription holds, since its introduction, the medium 
beight of adult men, and generally their fitness for military service, has diminished. 
Before the revolution (178!)), the minimum for the infantry in France was 1G5 centi- 
metres ; in 1818 (law of March 10th), 157; hy the law of 1852, 166 cm. ; on the 
average in France more than half are rejected on account of deficient height or bodily 
weakness. The military standard in Saxony was in 1780, 178 cm. It is now 166. 
In Prussia it is L57. According to the statement of Dr. Meyer in the Bavarian 
(Jazette, May 9th, l)Sfi:>, the result of an average of U years is, that in Prussia out of 
1000 conscripts 710 were unfit for military service, 317becauseof deficiency in height, 
lad 399 because of hodily defects. . . . Berlin in 1858 could not provide its con- 
tingent of recruits ; it was 156 men short." J. von Liebig : "Die Chemie in ihrei 
Aawendung <*uf A-rikultur und Physiologic, 18G3,'' 7th Ed., vol. 1., pp. 117, 1 i v . 
1 Tin- history of the Factory Act of 1850 will he found in the course of this chapter. 
I only touch here and there on the period from the beginning of modern imlu-ti \ 
in England to 1845. For this period I refer the reader to "Die Page der arhei 

leaden Elassein England, von Pried loh Bngela, Leipzig, 1846." How oompletel] 
Bngels understood the nature of the capitalist mode of production is shown by the 
Factory Reports, Reports on Mines, kc, that have appeared since 1S-15, and how 
wonderfully he painted the ciroumstanoei in detail is seen on the moot raperfioia] 
comparison ol his work with the official reports <>f the Children's Employment Oom 
minion, published 18 to 20 years latei [1 68 L867). Iheee deal especially with the 
btaaebes of industry in which the Factory Acts bad not, np to 1862, be< d Introduoed, 

introduoed. Here, then, Utile or bo alteration had beenenfon 
by authority, in the conditions painted by Bngela i bar r aw my examples ohieflj 
'rem the free trade p< riod after 18*8, thai age <»f paradise, <»f which the eommereial 
'•th for thegreal firm of free trade, Ma taut m ignorant! tell Mich labnlooe lalea 
rot tin nst England Bgures here In the foregronnd beoaoee she Is the alas Ic ■< pre 

■entail n- of Oapitalisl prodnetion, and slir alone has a OOntinUOUl Het Ol "tlninl 
itatistics of the things we are considering. 



224 Capitalist Production. 

end of the half hour nominally allowed for breakfast, and lo 
minutes at the beginning and end of the hour nominally allov, 
for dinner. He works for a quarter of an hour (sometimes 
aore, sometimes less) after 2 p.m. on Saturday. Thus his gaiu 



i 
is 



15 


minutes 


15 


n 


10 


n 


20 


» 



Before G a.m.,... 
After G p.m., ... 
At breakfast time, 
At dinner time, 



CO „ 
Five days — 300 minutes. 
On Saturday before 6 a.m. ... 15 minutes. 

At breakfast time, ... ... 10 „ 

After 2 p.m., ... ... ... 15 „ 



40 minutes. 
Total weekly, ... ... 340 minutes. 

Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 5C 
working weeks in the year (allowing two for holidays am 
occasional stoppages) is equal to 27 working days." 1 

" Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks 
are equal to two and a half days of produce in the year." 2 

" An additional hour a day gained by small instalments befon 
G a.m., after G p.m., and at the beginning and end of the time: 
nominally fixed for meals, is nearly equivalent to working li 
months in the year." 3 

Crises during which production is interrupted and the fa' 
tories work " short time," i.e., for only a part of the week 
naturally do not affect the tendency to extend the working 
day. The less business there is, the more pro tit hay to be mat 
on the business done. The less time spent in work, the mo] 
of that time has to be turned into surplus labour-time. 

1 Suggestions, &c. by Mr. L. Horner, Inspector of Factories, in : Factory K< go] 
tions Act. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, i)th August, L85U, p 
4, 5. 

- Reports of the Inspector of Factories for the half year, October, 185G, p. 35. 

3 Reports, &c, .'50th April, L858, p. '.). 



The Working Day. 225 

Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the 
crisis from 1857 to 1858 : 

* It may seem inconsistent that there should be any over- 
working at a time when trade is so bad ; but that very bad- 
ness leads to the transgression by unscrupulous men, they get 

the extra profit of it In the last half year, says Leonard 

Horner, 122 mills in my district have been given up ; 143 were 
found standing," yet, overwork is continued beyond the legal 
hours. 1 

" For a great part of the time," says Mr. Howell, "owing to the 
depression of trade, many factories were altogether closed, and a 
still greater number were working short time. I continue, how- 
ever, to receive about the usual number of complaints that half, 
or three-quarters of an hour in the day, are snatched from the 
workers by encroaching upon the times professedly allowed for 
rest and refreshment." 2 The same phenomenon was reproduced 
on a smaller scale during the frightful cotton-crisis from 18GI 
to 18G5. 3 " It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when 
persons are found at work in a factory, either at a meal hour, 
or at some illegal time, that they will not leave the mill at the 
appointed hour, and that compulsion is necessary to force them 
to cease work [cleaning their machinery, &c], especially on 
Saturday aiternoons. But, if the hands remain in a factory 
after the maehinery has ceased to revolve . . . they would not 
have been so employed if sufficient time had been set apart 
ially for cleaning, &c, either before 6 a.m. [sic!] or before 
- p.m. on Saturday aiternoons. "* 

1 Reportt, Ac, 1. c, p. 43. 
I Report*, <kc, 1. c, p. L'.~>. 

1 Report*, to. foi the half year ending 30th April, 1801. See Appendix No. 2; Re- 
port*, to., 31a< October, l^oJ, p. 7, . r >2, . r )3. The violations of the Aeta t m*innf more 
rameroui during the lust half year 1868. Of. Report*! ^ c » ending 81at Ootober, 
p. 7. 
* Reports, Ace, October 31st, I860, p. 28. With what Eanatioiain, aeoocding to the 
i manufacturer! given in courts of law, their hands let them* href against 
erery Interruption in factory Labour, the following oarioaseironnietanee ihows. In the 
•eghming of June, L836, information reached the. magistrate*: of Dewabury (York* 
that the own. r» of 8 large mills In the neighbourhood oi Batli y had i ml. it. d the 
Some of th« ie g< ntlemen irexe aoonaed of having kept ut iroi k . : - 1 
L2 and l"> yean of age, from <> a.m. on Friday to 4 p.m. on the following 
;,, not allowing them an} respite except for meali and om hour for sleep at 
Didmght. Ami these ohildren had to do thu ccasclcM lahour of 3U houis Ui the 

P 



2 26 Capitalist Production. 

" The profit to be gained by it (over- working in violation of 
the Act) appears to be, to many, a greater temptation than tl 
can resist; they calculate upon the chance of not being found 
out ; and when they see the small amount of penalty and costs, 
which those who have been convicted have had to pay, tl 
find that if they should be detected there will still be a con- 
siderable balance of gain. . . } In cases where the additional 
time is gained by a multiplication of small thefts in the course 
of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors 
making out a case." 8 

These " small thefts " of capital from the labourer's meal and 
recreation time, the factory inspectors also designate as " petty 
pilferings of minutes," 3 " snatching a few minutes," 4 or, as the 
labourers technically called them, " nibbling and cribbling at 
meal times." 6 

It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus- 
value by surplus-labour, is no secret. " If you allow me," said 
a highly respectable master to me, " to work only ten minu 
in the da}' over-time, you put one thousand a year in mj 
pocket." 6 " Moments are the elements of profit." 7 

Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than 
the designation of the workers who work full time as " full- 
timers," and the children under 13 who are only allowed I 
work 6 hours as " half-timers." The worker is here nothin 
more than personified labour-time. All individual distinction! 
are merged in those of " full-timers " and " half-timers.' 



"8 



" shoddy-hole," as the hole is called, in which the woollen rags are pulled in pieces 
and where a dense atmosphere of dust, shreds, <fcc, forces even the adult workman ■ 
cover his mouth continually with handkerchiefs for the protection of his lungs ! Tl 
accused gentlemen affirm in lieu of taking an oath — as quakers they were too scrupn 
lously religious to take an oath — that they had, in their great compassion for th 
unhappy children, allowed them four hours for sleep, but the obstinate childn 
absolutely would not go to bed. The quaker gentlemen were mulcted in £20. Dry 
den anticipated these gentry : 

" Fox full fraught in seeming sanctity, 
That feared an oath, but like the devil would lie, 
That look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer, 
And durst not sin ! before he said his prayer ! " 
» Rep., 31st Oct., 1S5G, p. 34. »L C, p. 48. M. c, p. 48. 

M. c, p. 35. <1. c, p. 48. «1. c, p. 48. 

? Report of the Insp. &c., 30th April, 18G0, p. 5G. 
■ This is the official expression both in the factories and in the report*. 



The Working Day. 227 



ECTION' 3. BRANCHES OF ENGLISH INDUSTRY WITHOUT LEGAL LIMITS TO 

EXPLOITATION. 

We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of 
fie working day, the were-wolf's hunger for surplus-labour in 
department where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, 
xys an English bourgeois economist, by the cruelties of the 
[laniards to the American red-skins, 1 caused capital at last to 
e bound by the chains of legal regulations. Now, let us cast 

lance at certain branches of production in which the exploita- 
ion of labour is either free from fetters to this day, or was so 
eeterda} r . 

Mr. Hroughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as 
hairman of a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, Nottingham, 
n the 14th January, 1860, "that there was an amount of 
rivation and suffering among that portion of the population 
onnected with the lace trade, unknown in other parts of the 
ingdom, indeed, in the civilized world . . . Children of 
ine or ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at two, 
iree, or four o'clock in the morning and compelled to work for 

bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their 
mbs wearing away, their frames dwindling, their faces whiten- 
ig, and their humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like 

upor, utterly horrible to contemplate We are not 

irprised that Mr. Mallett, or any other manufacturer, should 

and forward and protest against discussion The 

ystem, as the Rev. Montagu Valpy describes it, is <>ue of 
omitigated slavery, socially, physically, morally, and spiritually . 
. . . What can be thought of a town which hoi. Is ;t public 
leeting to petition that the period of labour for men shall be 

iminished to eighteen hours a day ? We declaim 

gain t the Virginian and Carolinian cotton-planters, [s their 

1 "Tin- cupidity of mill owner* whom; cruclthn in the ptOTUit of gain have hunlly 

1 ded bj thoie perpetrated by the Bpaniardi on the oonqnait <>f Ann 1 

lit of gold." John Wade, History of the Middle and Working ('Lis".. 

I. London, 1835, p. 1 1 1. The theoretioal pari of this book, • kin.l of band book of 

Economy, is, considering the time <>f its publication, original in mmm i 
/. "ii commercial crieea The hiatorioal pari in, to a grtal i it* nt, • ihamelcM 
iftariam of Su l'. M. k.Icu'h " Hietory of Iht Poor," London, ' 



-23 Capitalist Production. 

black-market, their lash, and their barter of human flesh inui 
detestable than this slow sacrifice of humanity which tuki 
} lace in order that veils and collars may be fabricated for tl 
benefil of capitalists ? ° l 

The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 
' 'ii the subject of three parliamentary inquiries. The result 
embodied in Mr. Scriven's Report of ]841 to the "Children 
Employment Commissioners," in the report of Dr. Greenhj 
of 1800 published by order of the medical officer of the Priv 
Council (Public Health, 3rd Report, 112-113), lastly, in tl 
report of Mr. Longe of ISG'2 in the "First Report of tl 
Children's Employment Commission, of the 13th June, 1SC3 
For my purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 18( 
and 18G3, some depositions of the exploited children themselve 
From the children we may form an opinion as to the adult 
especially the girls and women, and that in a branch of industi 
by the side of which cotton-spinning appears an agreeable ar 
healthful occupation, ? 

William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months wh( 
he began to work. He " ran moulds" (carried ready-mouldt 
articles into the drying room, afterwards bringing back 
empty mould) from the beginning. He came to work every 
in the week at 6 a.m., and left off about 9 p.m. " 1 work 
9 o'clock at night six days in the week. I have done so sev 
or eight weeks." Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 
old ! J. Murray, 12 years of age, says : " I turn jigger, and n 
moulds. I come at 6. Sometimes I come at 4. 1 worked 
night last night, till 6 o'clock this morning. I have not be 
in bed since the night before last. There were eight or n 
other boys working last night. All but one have come ti 
morning. I get 3 shillings and sixpence. I do not get any ni< 
for working at night. 1 worked two nights last week." Fern 
hough, a boy of ten : " I have not always an hour (for dinn< 
I have only half an hour sometimes ; on Thursday, Friday, a 
Saturday." ■ 

i " Daily Telegraph," 17th January, 1860. 
- Of. F. En-els' Uge, etc., p. 249-51. 
5 Children's Employment Commission. First report, etc., 1SG3. Evidence, p. 
l.t, is. 



The Working Day. 229 

Dr, Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the 
lottery districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is ex- 
traordinarily short. Although in the district of Stoke, only 
W"6% and in Wolstanton only 30'4°/ o of the adult male 
copulation above 20 are employed in the potteries, among tho 
nen of that age in the first district more than half, in th<> 
second, nearly f of the whole deaths are the result of pulmonary 
liseases among the potters. Dr. Boothroyd, a medical practitioner* 
it Ifanley, says : " Each successive generation of potters is mora 
lwarfed and less robust than the preceding one." In likej 
nanner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean: "Since he began to practi^o 
umong the potters 25 years ago, he had observed a marked 
ineration especially shown in diminution of stature and 
>readth." These statements are taken from the report of Dr. 
Ireenhow in 1800. 

From tie* report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following : 

>r. J. T. Arledge, senior physician of the North Staffordshire 

nfirmary, says : " The potters as a class, both men and women, 

•pre-. nt a degenerated population, both physically and morally. 

'hey arc, as a rule, stunted in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently 

[-formed in the chest; they become prematurely old, and are 

jertainly short-lived; they are phlegmatic and bloodless, and 

■xhiliit their debility of constitution by obstinate attacks of 

lyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys, and by 

leumatism. But of all diseases they are especially prone to 

■hest-disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and asthma. 

toe form would appear peculiar to them, and is known as 

asthma, or potter's consumption. Scrofula attacking 

li<; glands, or bones, or other parte "I" tin- body, is a disease <•! 

or more of the potters That the 'degener 

of the population of this district is Dot even greater 
ban it i^, is .in.- t<> the constant recruiting from the adjacent 
otmtry, and intermarriages with more healthy race 

Mr. Charli I'. ons, late house surgeon of the same institution, 
rritee in a letter t<» < Commissioner Longe, amongst other thing 
I can only speak from personal observation and not from 

1 Public Health, :<r.i rap !• 1"'.', LOf I' 

* Child. Ebnpl. Coram. I. Report, j> 24. 



230 Capitalist Production. 

statistical data, but I do not hesitate to assert that my u 
tion has been aroused again and again at the sight of po 
children whose health has been sacrificed to gratify the avari 
of either parents or employers." He enumerates the oaus 
of the diseases of the potters, and sums them up in the phra> 
" long hours." The report of the Commission trusts that " 
manufacture which has assumed so prominent a place in tl 
whole world, will not long be subject to the remark that i 
great success is accompanied with the physical deterioratio 
wide-spread bodily suffering, and early death of the workpeop 
. . by whose labour and skill such great results have bet 
achieved." 1 And all that holds of the potteries in England 
true of those in Scotland. 

The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, fro 
the discovery of the method of applying phosphorus to tl 
match itself. Since 1845 this manufacture has rapidly deve 
oped in England, and has extended especially amongst tl 
thickly populated parts of London as well as in Mancheste 
Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich, Newcastle and Gla 
gow. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vi-ni 
physician in 1845 discovered to be a disease peculiar 
lucifer-matchmakers. Half the workers are children un< 
thirteen, and young persons under eighteen. The manufacti 
is on account of its unheal thiness and unpleasantness in su< 
bad odour that only the most miserable part of the labourii 
class, half-starved widows and so forth, deliver up tli 
children to it, "the ragged, half-starved, untaught children. 

Of the witnesses that Commissioner AVhite examined (186! 
270 were under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only C \va 
old. A range of the working day from 12 to 14 or 15 hou 
night-labour, irregular meal times, meals for the most p 
taken in the very workrooms that are pestilent with phi 
phorus. Dante would have found the worst horrors of 
Inferno surpassed in this manufacture. 

in the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts a 
printed by machine; the finer by hand (block-printing). T 

1 Children's Employment Commission, p. 22, and xi. 
* 1. c. p. xlviL 
8 I.e. p. liv. 



The Working Day. 1 3 r 

most active business months are from the beginning of October 
to the end of April. During this time the work goes on fast 
and furious without intermission from G a.m. to 10 p.m. or 
further into the ni^ht. 

J. Leach deposes: "Last winter six out of nineteen giris 
were away from ill-health at one time from over- work. I have 
to bawl at them to keep them awake." W. Duffy : " I have 

D when the children could none of them keep their eyes 
open for the work; indeed, none of us could." J. Lightbourne: 
" Am 13 . . . We worked last winter till 9 (evening), and the 
winter before till 10. I used to cry with sore feet every night 
last winter. G. Apsden : "That boy of mine . . . when he 
was 7 years old I used to carry him on my back to and fro 
through the snow, and he used to have 16 hours a day ... I 
have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, 
for he could not leave it or stop." Smith, the managing 
partner of a Manchester factory : " We (he means his " hands " 
who work for " us ") work on, with no stoppage for meals, so 
that the day's work of 10J hours is finished by 4.30. p.m., and 
all after that is overtime." 1 (Does this Mr. Smith take no 
Is himself during 10. 1 , hours?) " We (this same Smith) sel- 
dom leave off working before 6 p.m. (he means leave off the 
nmption of 'our' labour-power machines), so that we 
(iterum Crispinus) are really working overtime the whole year 

round For all these, children and adults alike (152 

children and young persons and L40 adults), the average work 
for tin' last 18 months has been at the very least 7 days, ."> 
hours, or 781 hours a week. For the six weeks ending May 
2nd this year (1862), the average was higher — 8 days or S4 
hours a week." Still thif same Mr. Smith, who isso extremely 
devoted to the plnralis maji statis, adds with a smile, " Machine 
work is not great" So the employers in the block-printing 

1 Thin i* not to bo taken in the lame ncrim* n* our Ruplai labour tirmv 'Hieae 

1 l"!, hourM of labour m the norm*] working daj, irhiofa Imrlnriti 
of ooora the normal ■orpins-labour. After this begini "ortrdme 1 vhieh 
little better. It, vmII be teeo lat< r thai the labou tspoBdod during Um weaned 
norma] dayia paid below Its value, so that Mm overtiaM is sunprj nonpitali I 
1,1 ">••• r to ' \tort more mirplui labour, whiah it u.»nlil huh ba, - reel U th 
•xp aded during 1 1* . ■ uormal working *b»y \*< re proper!] paid. 



232 Capitalist Production. 

Bay : ' Hand labour is more healthy than machine-work." On 
the whole, manufacturers declare with indignation against the 
proposal " to stop the machines at least during meal timev' 
A clause, says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in 
the Borough, "which allowed work between, say G a.m. and 9 
p.m. . . . would suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours 
a.m. to G p.m., are not suitable. Our machine n always 
stopped for dinner. (What generosity!) There is no waste 
of paper and colour to speak of. But," he adds sympatheti- 
cally, " I can understand the loss of time not being liked.' 
The report of the Commission opines with naivete that the 
fear of some "leading firms " of losing time, i.e., the time f<>r 
appropriating the labour of others, and thence losing profit 
is not a sufficient reason for allowing children under 13, and 
3*oung persons under 18, working 12 to 1G hours per day. to 
lose their dinner, nor for cdvinor ^ £ t Dem as coa i ari( j water 
are supplied to the steam-engine, soap to wool, oil to the 
wheel — as merely auxiliary material to the instruments of 
labour, during the process of production itself. 1 

No branch of industry in England (we do not take into 
account the making of bread by machinery recently intro- 
duced) has preserved up to the present day a method of pro- 
duction so archaic, so — as we see from the poets of the Roman 
Empire — pre-christian, as baking. But capital, as was said 
earlier, is at first indifferent as to the technical character of the 
labour-process ; it begins by taking it just as it finds it. 

The incredible adulteration uf bread, especially in London 
was first revealed by the House of Commons Committee " on 
the adulteration of articles of food " (1855-5G), and Dr. 
Uassall's work, "Adulterations detected." 2 The consequence 
of these revelations was the Act of August Gth, 18GU, a foi 
preventing the adulteration of articles of food and drink," an 
inoperative law, as it naturally shows the tenderest consider- 
ation for every free-trader who determines by the buying or 
selling of adulterated commodities "to turn an honest penny." 

1 1. c. Evidence, p. 123, 124, 125, 140, and 51 

3 Alum finely powdered, or mixed with salt, is a normal article of commerce bear 
ing the significant name of " bakers' stuff." 

3 Soot is a well-known and very energetic form of carbon, and forms a manure 



The Working Day. 233 

The Committee itself formulated more or less naively its con- 
viction that free-trade meant essentially trade with adulter- 
ated, or as the English ingeniously put it, u sophisticated" goods. 
In fact this kind of sophistry knows better than Protagoras 
how to make white black, and black white, and better than 
the Kleatics how to demonstrate ad oculos that everything is 
only appearance. 1 

At all events the committee had directed the attention of 
the public to its " daily bread," and therefore to the baking 
trade. At the same time in public meetings and in petitions 
to Parliament rose the cry of the London journeymen bakers 
against their over- work, &c. The cry was so urgent that Mr. 
If. S. Tremenheere, also a member of the Commission of 1803 
several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner 
of Inquiry. His report, 2 together with the evidence given, 
roused not the heart of the public but its stomach. English- 
men, always well up in the Bible, knew well enough that man, 
unless by elective grace a capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, 

commanded to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, but 
they Hid not know that he had to eat daily in his bread a certain 
quantity of human perspiration mixed with the discharge of 
ahcesses, cobwebs, dead black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, 
without counting alum, sand, and other agreeable mineral in- 
gredients. Without any regard to his holiness, Freetrade, the 
baking- trade was therefore placed under the supervision 

that capital i tic chimney-sweeps sell to English farmers. Now in 1KC2 the British 
Juryman had in a law suit to decide whether soot, with which, unknown to the huyer, 
JK) V. of dust and sand an- mixed, is genuine n<>ot, in the commercial sense « adulter- 
•ted soot in th. 1. The "amis «iu oommeroe " decided it to be genuine 

eommercial soot, and non suit -I tin- plaintiff farmer, who had in addition to pay the 
<<mtH of the suit. 

1 ''li'' French chemist, Cbevallier, in his treatise on the "sophistications" of 
commodities, enumerates for many of th< 600 <>t more articles which he passes in 
r. riew, in. 20, 30 -lilt, rent methods of adult, ration. ][,■ f ,d.ls th.it be d... - noi I I 
»H the methods, and does not mention all thai In- known. II.- kinds of 

•dult. ration of sugar, !> of olive oil, lo of >,u t r . t, 12 ..f salt, i!» of milk, 90 of bread, 
mdy, 24 of meal, 28 of chocolate, 90 of nine, 92 of coffee, etc r 

k pe this fate. See Ronard d* Card, on the falsifications oi 
■aterial of th.- Sacrament. (!>.• in falsification dee sid.Ht.mc.h sacrament* lea, 
0.) 

" ticport, .'.<•.. r. latin- t-. tt .■ fjlasSjIIOOl complained of hy t)ic joutl.. ] 

'•• London, 1862, 'and "Second Report, fee., London, 196V' 



234 Capitalist Production. 

of the State inspectors (Close of the Parliamentary session of 
18G3), and by the same Act of Parliament, work from 9 in the 
evening to 5 in the morning was forbidden for journeymen 
bakers under 18. The last clause speaks volumes as to the 
over-work in this old-fashioned, homely line of business. 

" The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, 
at about eleven at night. At that hour he 'makes the dough, 
— a laborious process, which lasts from half-an-hour to three 
quarters of an hour, according to the size of the batch or the 
labour bestowed upon it. He then lies down upon the knead - 
ing-board, which is also the covering of the trough in which 
the dough is ' made ; ' and with a sack under him, and another 
rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for about a couple of hours. 
He is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about 
five hours — throwing out the dough, ' scaling it off,' moulding 
it, putting it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and 
fancy bread, taking the batch bread out of the oven, and up 
into the shop, &c, &c. The temperature of a bakehouse ranges 
from about 75 to upwards of 90 degrees, and in the smaller 
bakehouses approximates usually to the higher rather than to 
the lower degree of heat. When the business of making tin 
bread, rolls, &c, is over, that of its distribution begins, and 
considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, aftei 
working hard in the manner described during the night, an 
upon their legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets 
or wheeling hand-carts, and sometimes again in the bakehoust 
leaving off work at various hours between 1 and 6 p.n 
according to the season of the year, or the amount and natur 
of their master's business ; while others are again engaged ii 
the bakehouse in ' bringing out' more batches until late in tin 
afternoon. 1 . . . During what is called 'the London season,' tin 
operatives belonging to the ' full-priced ' bakers at the Wea 
End of the town, generally begin work at 11 p.m., and are en 
gaged in making the bread, with one or two short (sometime 
very short) intervals of r<>st, up to 8 o'clock the next morninj 
They are then engaged all Jay long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as lat 
as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying out bread, or sometimes ii 

1. c. First Report, fee., p. vi. 



The Working Day. 235 

the afternoon in the bakehouse again, assisting in the biscuit- 
baking. They may have, after they have done their work, 
sometimes five or six, sometimes only four or five hours' sleep 
before they begin again. On Fridays they always begin 
sooner, some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at 
work, either in making or delivering the bread up to 8 p.m. on 
Saturday night, but more generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, 
Sunday morning. On Sundays the men must attend twice or 
three times during the day for an hour or two to make pre- 
parations for the next day's bread. .... The men employed 
by the underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 
' full price,' and who, as already pointed out, comprise three- 
fourths of the London bakers) have not only to work on the 
average longer hours, but their work is almost entirely confined 
to the bakehouse. The underselling masters generally sell their 
bread. . . . in the shop. If they send it out, which is not common, 
except as supplying chandlers' shops, they usually employ other 
bands for that purpose. It is not their practice to deliver 

bread from house to house. Towards the end of the week 

the men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on 
with only slight intermission until late on Saturday evening." 1 
Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the 
" underselling" masters. " The unpaid labour of the men was 
made the source whereby the competition was carried on." J 
And the " full-priced " baker denounces his underselling com- 
petitors to the Commission of Enquiry as thieves of foreign 
labour and adulterators "They only exist now by first de 
frauding the public, and next getting is hours' work out of 
their men for 1 1! hours 1 wages." 1 

The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class 

bakers thai sells the bread below the full price, date from (he 

nning «>1 the L8th century, from the time when the 

corporate character of tic trade was lost, and the capitalist in 

the form of the miller or flour-factor, rises behind the nominal 

ter baker. 4 Thus was laid the foundation of capital i 

1 l. a j». lui. 1; i'l. Tii- History "f Baking, London, 

Bvidi the " full-priced " ImkiT riiri-si'Miiiii. p 10.H 

& fed, 1 c. At tin- end of Iht L7th Mid th« b< -inn in;; <>f tin- ImIi «•■ nturi.-« 

1 tort (agents) that orowdod Intotror] pottfbb till deno 



236 Capitalist Production. 

production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of the 
working day and of night labour, although the latter only 
since 1824 gained a serious footing even in London. 1 

After what has just been said, it will be understood that t 
Keport of the Commission classes journeymen bakers among 
the short-lived labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the 
normal decimation of the children of the working-class, rarely 
reach the ao*e of 42. Nevertheless, the baking trade is always 
overwhelmed with applicants. The sources of the supply of 
these labour-powers to London are Scotland, the western agri- 
cultural districts of England, and Germany. 

In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland 
organised at their own expense great meetings to agit 
against night and Sunday work. The public — e.ff., at the 
Dublin meeting in May, 1800 — took their part with Irish 
warmth. As result of this movement, day labour alone was 
successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny, Clonmel, Water- 
ford, &c. " In Limerick, where the grievances of the journey- 
men are demonstrated to be excessive, the movement has been 
defeated by the opposition of the master bakers, the miller 
bakers being the greatest opponents. The example of Limerick 
led to a retrogression in Ennis and Tipperary. In Cork, where 
the strongest possible demonstration of feeling took place, the 
masters, by exercising their power of turning the men out of 
employment, have defeated the movement. In Dublin, the 
master bakers have offered the most determined opposition t 1 
the movement, and by discountenancing as much as possible 
the journeymen promoting it, have succeeded in leading the 
men into acquiescence in Sunday w r ork and night work, con- 
trary to the convictions of the men." 3 

The Committee of the English Government, which Govern- 
ment, in Ireland, is armed to the teeth, and generally knows 
how to show it, remonstrates in mild, though funereal, tones 

" public nuisances." Thus the Grand Jury at the quarter session of the Justices of 
the Peace for the County of Somerset, addressed a presentment to the Lower House 
which, among other tilings, states, "that these factors of Blackwell Hall are a Public 
Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing Trade, and ought to be put down as a 
Nuisance." The case of our English Wool, <fcc, London, 1685, p. 6, 7. 

1 First Report, &c. 

^ Report of Committee on the Baking Trade in Ireland for 18^1. 



The Working Day. 257 

with the implacable master bakers of Dublin, Limerick, Cork, 
<Scc: "The Committee believe that the hours of labour are 
limited by natural laws, which cannot be violated with im- 
punity. That for master bakers to induce their workmen, by 
the fear of losing employment, to violate their religious con- 
victions and their better feelings, to disobey the laws ot the 
land, and to disregard public opinion (this all refers to Sunday 
labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen 
and masters, . . . and affords an example dangerous to religion, 
morality, and social order. . . . The Committee believe that 
any constant work beyond 1 2 hours a-day encroaches on the 
domestic and private life of the working man, and so leads to 
disastrous moral results, interfering with each man's home, and 
the discharge of his family duties as a son, a brother, a husband, 
I father. That work beyond 12 hours has a tendency to 
undermine the health of the working man, and so leads to 
premature old age and death, to the great injury of families of 
working men, thus deprived of the care and support of the 
head of the family when most required." 1 

80 far, we have dealt with Ireland. On the other side of 
the channel, in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the plough- 
man, protests against his 13-14 hours' work in the most in- 
nent climate, with 4? hours' additional work OE Sunday (in 
this land 01 Sabbatarians !),* whilst, at the same time, three 
railway men are standing before a London coroner's jury — a 
guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. A tremendous railway 
accident has hurried hundreds of passengers into another 
world The negligence of the employes is the cause of the 

' I. c. 

ting of agricultural laboureri at I.asswado, near Edinburgh, .January 

5th, 18GC. (See " Workmau'i Advocate," January 13th, L866.) The formation 

1 » of a Trade*' Union among tl olturallal kt first is 

Hid in a I . • nt. In one of the nm*L o|i)iiv-.m <l .ii;ri< ultural distlid 

England, Buckinghamshire, tin labourers, in March, l^i'n, made I gTeai itriki f"i 
Icly wage from 9-10 shillin ' (It will !• -■ ■ i. 

th< preceding passage thai the movement of the English agricultural pn 

d since the suppression of its riolenl I -i'"' 

the introduction <>f 1 1 1 ■ ■ ni e l'<>"i I-ium, begins again In the sizt 
until it bet tally epoch-making in 1872. [return t<> this la the 2nd volume, 

»H well o» to the hi u. books tii.it bare appeared su m the position of the I 

liafa land labourers. Addendum to the 3rd edj 



23S Capitalist Production. 

misfortune. They declare with one voice before the jury that 
ten or twelve years before, their labour only lasted eight hours 
a-day. During the last five or six years it had been screw.- 1 
up to 14, IS, and 20 hours, and under a specially severe pi 
sure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it often 
lasted for 40 or 50 hours without a break. They were ordinary 
men, not Cyclops. At a certain point their labour-power failed. 
Torpor seized them. Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to 
see. The thoroughly " respectable " British jurymen answered 
by a verdict that sent them to the next assizes on a charge of 
manslaughter, and, in a gentle " rider " to their verdict, ex- 
pressed the pious hope that the capitalistic magnates of the rail- 
ways would, in future, be more extravagant in the purchase of a 
sufficient quantity of labour-power, and more " abstemious" 
more " self-denying," more " thrifty/' in the draining of paid 
labour-power. 

From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, 
sexes, that press on us more busily than the souls of the slain 
on Ulysses, on whom — without referring to the blue books 
under their arms — we see at a glance the mark of over- work, 
let us take two more figures whose striking contrast proves 
that before capital all men are alike — a milliner and a black- 
smith. 

1 " Reynolds' Newspaper," January, 1866. — Every \7eek this same paper has, 
under the sensational headings, " Fearful and fatal accidents," " Appalling tragei I 
&c, a whole list of fresh railway catastrophes. On these an employe on the North 
►Staffordshire line comments : " Everyone knows the consequences that may occur if 
the driver anil fireman of a locomotive engine are not continually on the look-out. 
How can that be expected from a man who has been at such work for 29 or 30 hours, 
exposed to the weather, and without rest. The following is an example which is of 
very frequent occurrence : — One fireman commenced work on the Monday morning 
at a very early hour. "When he had finished what is called a day's work, he hail 
been on duty 14 hours 50 minutes. Before he had time to get his tea, he was again 
called on for duty. . . . The next time he finished he had been on duty 11 hours 
25 minutes, making a total of 29 hours 15 minutes without intermission. The rest 
of the week's work was made up as follows: — Wednesday, 15 hours ; Thursday. LB 
hours 35 minutes; Friday, 14} hours; Saturday, 14 hours 10 minutes, making a 
total for the week of 88 hours 40 minutes. Now, sir, fancy his astonishment on 
being paid 6} days for the whole. Thinking it was a mistake, he applied to the time- 
keeper, . . . and inquired what they considered a days work, and was told 13 hours 
for a goods man {i.e., 78 hours). . . . He then asked for what he had made over 
and above the 78 hours per week, but was refused. However, he was at last told 
they would give him another quarter, i.e., lOd." 1. c, 4th February, 1866. 



The Working Day. 239 

In the last week of June, 18G3, all the London daily papers 
published a paragraph with the " sensational " heading, " Death 
from simple over-work." It dealt with the death of the 
milliner, Mary Anne VValkley, 20 years of age, employed in a 
highly-respectable dressmaking establishment, exploited by a 
lady with the pleasant name of Elise. The old, oiten-told 
story, 1 was once more recounted. This girl worked, on an 
average, 1G£ hours, during the season often 30 hours, without a 
break, whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional 
supplies of sherry, port, or coffee. It was just now the height 
at' the season. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling 
of an eye the gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to 
the ball in honour of the newly-imported Princess of Wales. 
Mary Anne Walkley had worked without intermission for 2G£ 
hours, with GO other girls, 30 in one room, that only afford ed I 
of the cubic feet of air required for them. At night, they slept 
in pairs in one of the stifling holes into which the bedroom was 
divided by partitions of board. 2 And this was one of the best 
millinery establishments in London. Mary Anne Walkley fell 
ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonish- 
ment of Madame Elise, having previously completed the work 
in hand. The doctor, Mr. Keys, called too late to the death- 

1 Of, I Bngels. 1. c, pp. 263, 261 

1 Dr. L< th- t»y , Consulting Physician of the Board of Health, declared : "The mini- 
mum of air for each adult ought to be in a sleeping room 300, and in a dwelling room 
ibicfeet." J>r. Richardson, Senior Physician to one of the London Hospitals: 
"With needlewomen of all kinds, including milliners, dr« s.sinakers, and ordinary 
•'•m|>- iere ai three miseries — over-work, deficient air, und tithes deficient 

01 deficient digestion. . . . Needlework, in the main, ... is Infinitely 
ipted to women than to men. Put the mischiefs of the trade, in th< 
ially, are that it is monopolised by some tw< nty six capitalist*, who, 
mder the iat spring from capital, oan hi tag in irapital to foci a < i onomy 

ml of labour. This power tells throughout tin- whole class, it' ;i dressmaker i. in 
little circle oi rs, such is the oompetition that, in hei home, she n 

*'»rk ti» th( '1' nth to hold tog! ther, and this MUM BVi i w..rk she must of neces-ity 
• <m any who may assist her. If she fail, or do not try in<l< ptndl ntly, she BUtft 
hinuut, where her labour is not lets, hut where In i u 
Placed thus, sh< ■ i>« coi n< i a more slave, tossed about with the variation 
at borne, in one room, to it, then »hl;.i^. ci i.», 16, 

14, in an aii that Is learoely tolerable, and on i»>«>d whiob, evan it' it 
»ogoo<l, cannot !"• digested in the absence of pore air. Ob Un h^h mp 

. :m purely a disease <>f bad air, f is " Dr. EUohardeon! "^ trl 

lleview," 18th Jul) ,1- 



243 Capitalist Production. 

bed, duly bore witness before the coroner's jury that " Mar} 
Anne Walkley had died from long hours of work in an over- 
crowded workroom, and a too small and badly-ventilated bed- 
room." In order to give the doctor a lesson in good manneft, 
the coroner's jury thereupon brought in a verdict that " the 
deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to fear 
that her death had been accelerated by over-work in an over- 
crowded workroom, &c." " Our white slaves," cried the 
11 Morning Star," the organ of the free-traders, Cobden and 
Bright, " our white slaves, who are toiled into the grave, for 
the most part silently pine and die." 

"It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is 
the order of the day, but in a thousand other places ; in every 
place I had almost said, where ' a thriving business ' has to be 
done. . . . We will take the blacksmith as a type. If 
the poets were true, there is no man so hearty, so merry, as 
the blacksmith ; he rises early and strikes his sparks before 
the sun ; he cats and drinks and sleeps as no other man. 
Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the best of 
human positions, physically speaking. But we follow r him int< 
the city or town, and we see the stress of work on that strong 
man, and what then is his position in the death-rate of hi 
country. In Marylebone, blacksmiths die at the rate of 31 pe 
thousand per annum, or 11 above the mean of the male adulfc 
of the country in its entirety. The occupation, instinctiv 

1 " Morning Star," 23rd June, 18G3.— The "Times " made use of the circumstan 
to defend the American slave owners against Lright, &c. " Very many of us think, 
says a leader of July 2nd, 1863, " that, while we work our own young women 
death, using the scourge of starvation, instead of the crack of the whip, as the instn 
ment of compulsion, we have scarcely a right to hound on fire and .slaughter again* 
families who were born slave owners, and who, at least, feed their slaves well, an 
work them lightly." In the same mauner, the "Standard," a Tory organ, fell fo 
of the Rev. Newman Hall : " He excommunicated the slave owners, but prays wit 
the fine folk who, without remorse, make the omnibus drivers and conductors 
London, &c, work 1G hours a-day for the wages of a dog." Finally, spake the orach 
Thomas Carlyle, of whom I wrote, in 1850, "Zum Teufel ist der Genius, der Kultu 
ist geblieben." In a short parable, he reduces the one great event of conteinporar 
history, the American civil war, to this level, that the Peter of the North wants t 
break the head of the Paul of the South with all his might, because the Peter of th 
North hires his labour by the day, and the Paul of the South hires his by the lift 
(" Macmillan's Magazine." Ilias Americana in nuce. August, 1863.) Thus, tl 
bubble of Tory sympathy for the urban workers -by no means for the rural— hi 
hurst at last. The j>uui of all is -slavery ! 



The Working Day. 241 

almost as a portion of human art, unobjectionable as a branch 
of human industry, is made by mere excess of work, the de- 
stroyer of the man. He can strike so many blows per day, walk 
so many steps, breathe so many breaths, produce so much 
work, and live an average, say of fifty years ; he is made to 
strike so many more blows, to walk so many more steps, to 
breathe so many more breaths per day, and to increase alto- 
gether a fourth of his life. He meets the effort ; the result is, 
that producing for a limited time a fourth more work, he dies 
at :J7 for 50." J 



SECTION 4. — DAY AND NIGHT WORK. THE RELAY SYSTEM. 

Constant capital, the means of production, considered from 
the standpoint of the creation of surplus-value, only exist to 
absorb labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional 
[oantity of surplus-labour. While they fail to do this, their 
mere existence causes a relative loss to the capitalist, for they 
represent during the time they lie fallow, a useless advance of 
apital. And this loss becomes positive and absolute as soon 
as the intermission of their employment necessitates additional 
outlay at the recommencement of work. The prolongation of 
the working day beyond the limits of the natural day, into 
tin- night, only acts as a palliative It quenches only in a slight 
ree the vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. To 
appropriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore, 
the inherent tendency of capitalist production. But as it is 
physically impossible to exploit the Bame individual labour- 
power constantly during the night as well as the day, to over- 
come this physical hindrance, an alternation becomes necessarj 
between the workpeople whose powers are exhausted by day, 
and those who are used up by night This alternation may be 
effected in various ways; >.</.. it may be so arranged that part 
ol tin- workers are one week employed on day work, the nexl 
week on nighl work. It is well-known thai this relay Bystem, 
tins alternation of two sets ol workers, held full .sway in the 
lull blooded youth-time of the English cotton manufacture, and 

1 1 '1 Riohardaon, 1. c 



242 Capitalist Production. 

that at the present time it still flourishes, among others, in the 
cotton spinning of the Moscow district. This 2f hours' pi 
of production exists to-day as a system in many of the. 
brandies of industry of Great Britain that are still " fre 
the blast-furnaces, forges, plate-rolling mills, and other metal- 
lurgical establishments in England, Wales, and Scotland. Th»j 
working time here includes, besides the 24 hours of the C 
working days, a great part also of the 24 hours of Sunday. 
The workers consist of men and women, adults and children 
of both sexes. The agesof the children and young persons run 
through all intermediate grades, from 8 (in some cases from 6] 
to IS. 1 

In some branches of industr}', the girls and women wort 
through the night together with the males. 2 

Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night 
labour, 3 the duration of the process of production, unbroken dur 

1 Children's Employment Commission. Third Keport. London, 18G4, p. iv., v., vi 

2 "Both in Staffordshire and in South Wales young girls and women are employe* 
on the pit banks and on the coke heaps, not only by day but also by night. Thi 
practice has been often noticed in Reports presented to Parliament, as being attend* 
with great and notorious evils. These females employed with the men, hardly dis 
tinguished from them in their dress, and begrimed with dirt and smoke, are expose 
to the deterioration of character, arising from the loss of self-respect, which ca 
hardly fail to follow from their unfeminine occupation." (1. c. 1 ( J4., p. ixvi. C: 
Fourth Report (18G5), 61, p. xiii.) It is the same in glass-works. 

3 A steel manufacturer who employs children in night-labour remarked : ' 
seems but natural that boys who work at night cannot sleep and get proper rest 
day, but will be running about." (1. c. Fourth Report, 63, p. xiii.) On the impor 
ance of sunlight for the maintenance and growth of the body, a physician write* 
"Light also acts upon the tissues of the body directly in hardening them and supportii 
their elasticity. The muscles of animals, when they are deprived of a proper amoui 
of light, become soft and inelastic, the nervous power loses its tone from defectit 

stimulation, and the elaboration of all growth seems to be perverted 1 

the case of children, constant access to plenty of light during the day, and to tl 
direct rays of the sun for a part of it, is most essential to health. Light assists in 1 
elaboration of good plastic blood, and haidens the fibre after it has boon laid dov 
It also acts as a stimulus upon the organs of sight, and by this means brings ab< 
more activity in the various cerebral functions." Dr. W. Strange, Senior I 

of the Worcester General Hospital, from whose work on "Health" (1^ 
pMMge is taken, writes in a letter to Mr. White, one of the commissioners : " I hi 
had opportunities formerly, when in Lancashire, of observing the effects of night-wi 
upon children, and I have no hesitation in saying, contrary to what some employ 
were fond of asserting, those children who were subjected to it soon Buffered in tli 
wealth." (1. c. 2S4., p. 66.) That such a question should furnish the material 
serious controversy, shows plainly how capitalist production acts on the bra 
functions of capitalists and their retainers. 



The Working Day. 243 



ng the 24 hours, offers vary welcome opportunities of exceeding 

:he limits of the normal working day, e.g., in the branches of 

ndustry already mentioned, which are of an exceedingly 

fatiguing nature ; the official working day means for each 

worker usually 12 hours by night or day. But the over- work 

•nd this amount is in many cases, to use the words of the 

English official report, " tiuly fearful." 1 

"It is impossible," the report continues, " for any mind to 

•r'tlise the amount of work described in the following passages 

ia being performed by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age . . . . 

without coming irresistibly to the conclusion that such abuses 

if the power of parents and of employers can no longer be 

tllowed to <'xist." a 

"The practice of boys working at all by day and night 

urns either in the usual course of things, or at pressing times, 

is inevitably to open the door to their not (infrequently 

sinking undul} r long hours. These hours are, indeed, in some 

\ t not only cruelly but even incredibly long for children. 

Vmongst a number of boys it will, of course, not unfrequently 

lappen tin ;it one or more are from some cause absent. When 

blfl happens, their place is made up by one or more boys, 

ho work in tic other turn. That this is a well understood 

:i is plain . . . from the answer of the manager of 

ome Large rolling-mills, who. when I asked him how the 

of the boys absent from their turn was made up, '1 

av, sir, you know that as well as I do,' and admitted the 

act"' 

"At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from o' a.m. 

p.m., a boy worked about lour nights every week till 

p.m. at Least . . . and this for six months. Another, at 9 

old, sometimes made three L 2-hour shifts running, and, 
Lien 10, has made two daya and two nights runnL A 

lurd, "n«»w 10 ... worked from 6 a.m. till 12 p.m. three 
and till !> p.m. the other nights." M Another, now L3, 
. . worked from <"> p.m. till LS noon nexl day, for a v 
igether, and sometimes for three bo gether, e.g. t from 

Londay morning till Tuesday night." Another, no* 1 •_', baa 
'I.e. ',7, p. m,. - 1. ,-. 1 ,,,,•!, Beporl . p. mi. *l 



2 \ \ Capitalist Production. 

worked in an iron foundry at Stavely from G a.m. till 12 pjt 
for a fortnight on end ; could not do it any more." "G 
Allinsworth, age 9, came here as cellar-boy last Friday; ne> 
morning we had to begin at 3, so I stopped here all nigh 
Live five miles off. Slept on the floor of the furnac- 
head, with an apron under me, and a bit of a jacket over im 
The two other days I have been here at G a.m. Aye ! it is fan 
in here. Before I came here I was nearly a year at the 
work at some works in the country. Began there, too, at 3 o 
Saturday morning — always did, but was very gain [near] hoim 
and could sleep at home. Other days I began at 6 in the inorr 
ing, and gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening," &C. 1 

1 1. c, p. xiii. The degree of culture of these " labour-powers " must naturally 1 
such as appears in the following dialogues with one of the commissioners : Jeremia 
Haynes, age 12 — "Four times four is 8 ; 4 fours are 16. A king is him that has all t! 
money and gold. We have a King (told it is a Queen), they call her the Prince 
Alexandra. Told that she married the Queen's son. The Queen's son is the Prince 
Alexandra. A Princess is a man." William Turner, age 12 — "Don't live in En 
land. Think it is a country, but didn't know before." John Morris, age 14 I 
" Have heard say that God made the world, and that all the people was drownch 
but one; heard say that one was a little bird." William Smith, age 15 — "G< 
made man, man made woman." Edward Taylor, age 15 — "Do not know of Lo 
don." Henry Matthewman, age 17 — " Had been to chapel, but missed a good ma; 
times lately. One name that they preached about was Jesus Christ, but I canu 
say any others, and I cannot tell anything about him. He was not killed, but di 
like other people. He was not the same as other people in some ways, because 
was religious in some ways, and others isn't." (1. c. p. xv.) " The devil ia a p 
person. I don't know where he lives. " " Christ was a wicked man." "This girl sp 
God as dog, and did not know the name of the queen." (" Ch. Employment (on 
V. Report, 18G6," p. 55, n. 278.) The same system obtains in the glass and pa 
works as in the metallurgical, already cited. In the paper factories, where the pa] 
in made by machinery, night-work is the rule for all processes, except rag-sorti 
In some cases night-work, by relays, is carried on incessantly through the whole w< 
usually from .Sunday night until midnight of the following Saturday. Those who 
on day-work work 5 days of 12, and 1 day of 18 hours ; those on night-work 5 nigh 
12, and 1 of (5 hours in each week. In other cases each set works 24 hours const 
tively on alternate days, one set working 6 hours on Monday, and 18 on Satin I 
to make up the 24 hours. In other cases an intermediate system prevails, by wl 
all employed on the paper-making machinery work 15 or 16 hours every day in 
week. This system, says Commissioner Lord, "seems to combine all tin 
both the 12 hours' and the 24 hours' relays." Children under 13, young persona mi 
18, and women, work under this night system. Sometimes under the 1l' ho 
system they are obliged, on account of the non-appearance of those that ought 
relieve them, to work a double turn of 24 hours. The evidence proves that 1' 
and girls very often work over-time, which, not unf requently, extends to 24 or ev< 
hours of uninterrupted toil. In the continuous and unvarying process of glazing 
found girls of 12 wdio work the whole month 14 hours a day, " without any r0J 



The Working Day. 245 

Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours 1 
system. The extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the 
' cruel and incredible " extension of the working day are natur- 
ally passed over in silence. Capital only speaks of the system 
in its " normal " form. 

Messrs. Naylor & Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ 
between GOO and 700 persons, among whom only 10 per cent, 
ue under 18, and of those, only 20 boys under 18 work in 
night sets, thus express themselves: "The boys do not suffer 
from the heat. The temperature is probably from 86° to 90°. 

. . . At the forges and in the rolling-mills the hands 
work night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the 
work arc day work, i.e., from a.m. to G p.m. In the forge the 
hours arc from 12 to 12. Some of the hands always work in 
the night, without any alternation of day and night work. 
. . . . We do not find any difference in the health of those 
who work regularly by night and those who work by day, and 
probably people can sleep better if they have the same period 

"first than if it is changed About 20 of the boys 

under the a^e of 18 work in the night sets We 

could not well do without lads under IS working by night. 
The objection would be the increase in the cost of production. 

. . . Skilled hands and the heads in every department 
are difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number. . 

. . . But from the small proportion of boys thai we employ 
the subject (i.e., of restrictions on night work) is of little ini- 
1 1 rtance or interest to us." 1 

Mr. .1. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. John Brown & I 
tee! and iron works, employing about 3000 men and boys, part 
of whose operations, namely, iron and ln-a\i«-r st.-el work, goes 
on night and day by relays, Btates "that in the heavier Bteel 
work one or two boys are employed to a score or two men." 
Their concern employs upwards of 500 boys under 18, of whom 
about '.or L 70 are under the ace of L3. With reference to the 

it most, 8 break of half -an-hour enoh foi In 

torn mills, when n ;ulai night wrork hai been entirelj given up. ©v« work gtt 
>le extent, "and thai often in the dirtieat, and in the hott 
monotonou <>f the varioui pro ("Oh. Employment Comia B 

IV., 18oT>," p. xxxviii. uml xxxix.) Fourth Report, iti 



246 Capitalist Production. 

proposed alteration of the law, Mr Ellis says : " I do not think 
it would be very objeetionable to require that no person undei 
the age of 18 should work more than 12 hours in the 24-. But 
we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age ol 
12, at which boys could be dispensed with for night work. Bui 
we would sooner be prevented from employing boys under the 
age of 13, or even so high as 14, at all, than not be allowed t< 
employ boys that we do have at night. Those boys win 
work in the day sets must take their turn in the night sets also 
because the men could not work in the night sets only ; ii 

would ruin their health We think, however, thai 

night work in alternate weeks is no harm. (Messrs. Naylor ,\ 
Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the interest 
their business, considered that periodically changed night-laboui 
might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.) W< 
find the men who do it, as well as the others who do othei 

work only by day Our objections to no 

allowing boys under 18 to work at night, would be on accoun 
of the increase of expense, but this is the only reason. (Wha 
cynical naivete !) We think that the increase would be mon 
than the trade, with due regard to its being successfully carrier 
out, could fairly bear. (What mealy-mouthed phraseology ! 
Labour is scarce here, and might fall short if there were sue) 
a regulation." (i.e., Ellis Brown & Co. might fall into the fat; 
perplexity of being obliged to pay labour-power its full value. 
The " Cyclops Steel and Iron Works/' of Messrs. Cammell J 
Co., are conducted on the same large scale as those of the abo 1 
mentioned John Brown & Co. The managing director hat 
1 landed in his evidence to the Government Commissioner, M 
White, in writing. Later he found it convenient to suppiti 
the MS. when it had been returned to him for revision. M 
White, however, has a good memory. He remembered quit 
clearly that for the Messrs. Cyclops the forbidding of the nigh( 
labour of children and young persons " would be impossible, i 
would be tantamount to stopping their works," and yet thei 
business employs little more than 6 °/ of b°y s under 18, an 
less than 1 % under 13." 

U. c. SO, p. xvi. 2 1. e. 82, p. xvii. 



The Working Day. 247 

On the same subject Mr. E. F. Sanderson, of the firm of 
Sanderson, Bros., & Co., steel rolling-mills and^forges, AtterclifFe, 
says : " Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys 
under 18 from working at night. The chief would be the in- 
crease of cost from employing men instead of boys. I cannot 
say what this would be, but probably it would not be enough 
to enable the manufacturers to raise the price of steel, and con- 
sequently it would fall on them, as of course the men (what 
queer-headed folk ! ) would refuse to pay it." Mr. San- 
derson does not know how much he pays the children, but 
" perhaps the younger boys get from 4s. to 5s. a week. . . . 
The boys' work is of a kind for which the strength of the boys 
is generally ('generally,' of course not always) quite sufficient, 
and consequently there would be no gain in the greater strength 
of the men to counterbalance the loss, or it would be only in 
the Tow cases in which the metal is heavy. The men would 
not like so well not to have boys under them, as men would be 

obedient. Besides, boys must begin young to learn the 
trade. Leaving day work alone open to boys would not answer 
this purpose." And why not ? Why could not boys learn 
their handicraft in the day-time ? Your reason? "Owing to 
the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men 
would be separated half the time from their boys, and would 

half the profit which they make from them. The training 
which they give to an apprentice is considered as part of the 
return for the boys' labour, and thus enables the men to get it 
at a cheaper rate. Each man would want half of this profit." 
In other words, Messrs. Sanderson would have to pay part of 
the wages of the adult men out of their own pockets instead of 
by the night work" of the boys. Messrs. Sanderson's profit 

would thus fall to some extent, and this is the good Sandersonian 

>n why boys cannot learn their handicraft in the <lay.' In 

addition to this, it would throw night labour on those who 

worked in bead of the boys, which they would not be able I 1 

1 In our 1 • 61 mio || not worth much who MfcMIOi I 

:;"'>. I reason foi everything, do matter how bid Of how oraxr, Everything in the 
world that has been done wi been dono wrong for the vcrj l>< -t oi 

■I, 1. c, p. 249.) 



248 Capitalist Production. 

stand. The difficulties in fact would be so great that they 
would very likely lead to the giving up of night work alt- igether, 
and " as far as the work itself is concerned," says E. F. Sander- 
son, " this would suit as well, but — " But Messrs. Sanderson 
have something else to make besides steel. Steel-makinj 
simply a pretext for surplus-value making. The smelting 
furnaces, rolling-mills, &c, the buildings, machinery, iron, e 
&c., have something more to do than transform themselves into 
steel. They are there to absorb surplus-labour, and naturally 
absorb more in 24 hours than in 12. In fact they give, by 
grace of God and law, the Sandersons a cheque on the working 
time of a certain number of hands for all the 24 hours of the 
day, and they lose their character as capital, are therefore a 
pure loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their function of 
absorbing labour is interrupted. "But then there would be 
the loss from so much expensive machinery, lying idle half the 
time, and to get through the amount of work which we are able 
to do on the present system, we should have to double our 
premises and plant, which would double the outlay." But why 
should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by 
the other capitalists who only work during the day, and whose 
buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie " idle " during 
the night ? E. F. Sanderson answers in the name of all the 
Sandersons : " It is true that there is this loss from machinery 
lying idle in those manufactories in which work only goes on 
by day. But the use of furnaces would involve a further loas 
in our case. If they were kept up there would be a wast 
fuel (instead of, as now, a waste of the living substance of the 
workers), and if they were not, there would be loss of time in 
laying the fires and getting the heat up (whilst the loss 
sleeping time, even to children of 8 is a gain of working 
time for the Sanderson tribe), and the furnaces themselves 
would suffer from the changes of temperature." (Whilst these 
same furnaces sutler nothing from the day and night change of 
labour.) 1 

1 1. c. 85, p. xvii. To similar tender scruples of the glass manufacturers that regular 
meal times for the children arc impossible because as a consequence a certain quantity 
of heat, radiated by the furnaces, would he "a pure loss" or "wasted," Com- 
miasionez White makes answer. His answer is unlike that of Ure, Senior, &c, and 



The Working Day. 249 



SECTION 5.— THE STRUGGLE FOR A NORMAL WORKING DAY. COMPULSORY 
LAWS FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE WORKING DAY FROM THE MIDDLE OF 
THE 14TH TO THE END OF THE 17TH CENTURY. 

M What is a working day ? What is the length of time 
during which capital may consume the labour-power whose 
daily value it buys ? How far may the working day be ex- 
tended beyond the working time necessary for the reproduction 
of labour-power itself?" It has been seen that to these 
questions capital replies : the working day contains the full 24 
hoars, with the deduction of the few hours of repose without 
which labour-power absolutely refuses its services again. 
Hence it is self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his 
whole life through, than labour-power, that therefore all his 
disposable time is by nature and law labour-time, to be devoted 
to the self-expansion of capital. Time for education, for 
intellectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions 
and for social intercourse, for the free-play of his bodily and 
mental activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a 

their puny German plagiarists ii la Roscher who are touched ny the "abstinence,"' 

" self •denial," "saving,'' of the capitalists in the expenditure of their gold, and by their 

Timur -Tamer Ian is h prodigality of human life! "A certain amount of heat beyond 

what iH usual at present might also be going to waste, if meal times were secured in 

these oases, but it seems lik<-ly not equal in money-value to the waste of animal 

rig on in glass-houses throughout the kingdom from growing boys not 

I tving enough quiet time to eat their meals at ease, with a little rest afterwards for 

tion." (I.e., p. xlv.) And this in the year of progresi \^ t >'< ! Without con- 

penditure of Btrength in lifting and carrying, such a child, in the iheda 

bottle and flint glass are made, walks during the pa foi manee of his work 15 . ' l 

mflse in every <> hours! And the work often lasts 11 "i L6 hours I In many of 

- woiks, as in the Moscow spinning mills, the sysi m of 6 hours' relays > s hi 

"During the working part of the week sis hours is the utmost unbroken 

i ever attained al any one time for rest, and out of this has to oomc the time 

in coming and going to and from work, washing, dressing, and meals, leaving! 

bori period indeed foi rest, and none foi fresh air and play, nnleesatthe exp 

of tin' uleep ncce-ssary for young hoys, is].. ci.illy at such hot and fatiguing \soik. 

• . . Even the shorl ileep is obviously liable to be broken by a boy having to wake 

11 it it is night, "i \,y the noise, if it is day. " Mr \\ ; i boy 

worin there where boys of 12 drudged on until 2 In the morn* 

ind then ilepi in th. works nil D a.m. (8 hours!) only bo reeume their work. 
amount of w<.ii<," say Tremenheere and Tufnell, who drafted the general 
report, "done by boys, youths, girls, and woman, in the oourse of their dailj or 
nightly spell of labour, is certainly extraordinary. (1. e., xliii. and xlii 
iit« b] ni. lit perhaps, sell denying Mr. Olass Capital, primed with poti irine, 
<hil> homeward droning out idiotically, " Britons never, n< rei i^li.ill l>. 



250 Capitalist Production. 

country of Sabbatarians I) 1 — moonshine ! But in its blind 
unrestrainable passion, its were-wolf hunger for surplus-labour, 
capital oversteps not only -the mora), but even the merely 
physical maximum bounds of the working day. It usurps 
time for growth, development, and healthy maintenance of 
the body. It steals the time required for the consumption of 
fresh air and sunlight. It higgles over a meal-time, incorpor- 
ating it where possible with the process of production itself 
that food is given to the labourer as to a mere means of pro- 
duction, as coal is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil to the 
machinery. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the r< 
ration, reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to ju.^ 
many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism, absolutely 
exhausted, renders essential. It is not the normal maintenance 
of the labour-power which is to determine the limits of the 
working day ; it is the greatest possible daily expenditure of 
labour-power, no matter how diseased, compulsory, and painful 
it may be, which is to determine the limits of the labourers' 
period of repose. Capital cares nothing for the length of life 
of labour-power. All that concerns it is simply and solely the 
maximum of labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in ; 
working day. It attains this end by shortening the extent o 
the labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased pro 
duce from the soil by robbing it of its fertility. 

The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the pro- 
duction of surplus-value, the absorption of surplus-labour] 
produces thus, with the extension of the working day, not onlj 
the deterioration of human labour-power by robbing it of it: 

1 la England even now occasionally in rural districts a labourer is condemned U 
imprisonment for desecrating the Sabbath, by working in his front garden. The sarru 
labourer is punished for breach of contract if he remains away from his metal, paper 
or glass works on the Sunday, even if it be from a religious whim. The orthodox 
Parliament will hear nothing of Sabbath-breaking if it occurs in the process of «• 
panding capital. A memorial (August 18(53), in which the London day-labour 
fish and poultry shops asked for the abolition of Sunday labour, states that their work 
lasts for the first (> days of the week on an average 15 hours a-day, and on Sunday 
8-10 hours. From this same memorial we learn also that the delicate gourmand 
among the aristocratic hypocrites of Exeter Hall, especially encourage this " Sunday 
labour." These " holy ones," bo zealous in cvte curanrfa, show their Christianity by 
the humility with which they bear the overwork, the privations, and the hunger of 
others. Obscquium ventris idis (the laboiurrt) pcrniciosius est. 



The Working Day. 251 

normal, moral and physical, conditions of development and 
function. It produces also the premature exhaustion and death 
of this labour-power itself. 1 It extends the labourer's time of 
production during a given period by shortening his actual life- 
time. 

J Jut the value of the labour-power includes the value of the 
commodities necessary for the reproduction of the worker, or 
for the keeping up of the working class. If then the unnatural 
extension of the working day, that capital necessarily strives 
after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the 
length of life of the individual labourer, and therefore the 
duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have to be re- 
placed at a more rapid rate and the sum of the expenses for 
tht; reproduction of labour-power will be greater ; just as in a 
machine the part of its value to be reproduced every day is 
{greater the more rapidly the machine is worn out. It would 
leem therefore that the interest of capital itself points in the 
direction of a normal working day. 

The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. If 
be Loses his slave, he loses capital that can only be restored by 
Dew outlay in the slave-mart. But "the rice-grounds of 
1 >rgia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may be fatally in- 
jurious to the human constitution; but the waste of human 
life which the cultivation of these districts necessitates, is not 
10 _t> .it that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves 
of Virginia and Kentucky. Considerations <>i" economy, more- 
over, which, under a natural system, afford some security for 
bumane treatment by identifying the master's interest with 
tip- slave's preservation, when once trading in slaves Lb practised, 
•me reasons for racking t<> the uttermost tie- t< il of the 
■ ■•; i'<>\\ when bis place can at once be supplied from foreign 
pre the duration of his life becomes a matter of less 

moment than its productiveness while it lasts. It is accord- 
ingly a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing 
countries, that the m. »^r . • 1 1 '. ctive economy is that which tak< 1 

1 " w ■• Li-. ■ • given in our pveviooi reports thf rertl ex] 

irei • i" the effeol thai ot< i boon, . . . <•■ H rinly bend pn HUttanly I 

if the in. 11. ' (1. Ot Bi| i». diLJ 



252 Capitalist Production. 

out of the human chattel in the shortest space of time the 
utmost amount of exertion it is capable of putting forth, k 
is in tropical culture, where annual profits often equal the 
whole capital of plantations, that negro life is most reckle- 
sacrificed. It is the agriculture of the West Indies, which 
been for centuries prolific of fabulous wealth, that has engulfed 
millions of the African race. It is in Cuba, at this day, wh 
revenues are reckoned by millions, and whose planters 
princes, that we see in the servile class, the coarsest fare, the 
most exhausting and unremitting toil, and even the absolute 
destruction of a portion of its numbers every year." 1 

Miitato nomine de te f alula narratwr. For slave-ti; 
read labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and 
the agricultural districts of England, Scotland, and Wi 
for Africa, Germany. We heard how over- work thinned the 
ranks of the bakers in London. Nevertheless, the London 
labour-market is always over-stocked with German and other 
candidates for death in the bakeries. Pottery, as we saw. is 
one of the shortest-lived industries. Is there any want there- 
fore of potters ? Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern 
pottery, himself originally a common workman, said in 1785 
before the House of Commons that the whole trade employed 
from 15,000 to 20,000 people. 2 In the year 1861 the population 
alone of the town centres of this industry in Great Britain 
numbered 101,302. " The cotton trade has existed for ninety 
years. ... It has existed for three generations of the English 
race, and I believe I ma}^ safely say that during that period it 
has destroyed nine generations of factory operatives." 3 

No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour- 
market shows significant gaps. In 1834-, e.g. But then the 
manufacturers proposed to the Poor Law Commissioners that 
they should send the " surplus-population " of the agricultural 
districts to the north, with the explanation " that the manu- 
facturers would absorb and use it up." 4 " Agents were ap- 
pointed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners. . . . 

1 Cairnes, "The Slave Power," p. 110, 111. 

2 John Ward : " History of the Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent," London, 1843, 

3 Ferrand'a Speech in the House of Common*, 27th April. 1863. 

4 " Those were the very words used by the cotton manufacturers,"' 1. c. 



The Working Day. 253 

An office was set up in Manchester, to which lists were sent of 
those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employ- 
ment, and their names were registered in books. The manu- 
facturers attended at these offices, and selected such persons as 
they chose ; when they had selected such persons as their 
1 wants required,' they gave instructions to have them for- 
warded to Manchester, and they were sent, ticketed like bales 
of goods, by canals, or with carriers, others tramping on the 
road, and many of them were found on the way lost and hall- 
starved. This system had grown up into a regular trade. 
This House will hardly believe it, but I tell them, that this 
traffic in human flesh was as well kept up, they were in effect 
as regularly sold to these [Manchester] manufacturers as slaves 

sold to the cotton-grower in the United States In 

I v ';0, 'the cotton trade was at its zenith.' .... The man u- 
factu re rs again found that they were short of hands. . . . They 
applied to the 'flesh agents,' as they are called. Those agents 
-.■tit to the southern downs of England, to the pastures of Dor- 
setshire, to the glades of Devonshire, to the people tending 
kin*: in Wiltshire, but they sought in vain. The surplus- 
population was 'absorbed." The " Bury Guardian" said, on 
completion of the French treaty, that "10,000 additional 
hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and that 30,000 or 
10,000 will be needed." After the "flesh agents and sub- 
it-." had in vain sought through the agricultural district-, 
leputation came up to London, and waited on the right hon. 
gentleman [Mr. Villiers, President of the Poor Law Board] with 
a view of obtaining poor children from certain union hou 
for the mills of Lancashire/' 1 

1 1. 0. .Mi. Villiers, despite tin- !»• ni of Intention! on bii pai I . liged 

the requetta of the manufacturers. Th< otlemen, however, attained 

tli< ii eml through the obliging nature of the local pool Inn bonrde. Mr. A Red| i.i\< , 
1 1 ictories, that tlii-. tunc the system under which orphans and 

pauper children were treated "legally" as appn nl not accompanied with 

11 tin--.- '• ;iiiu l . 1. <•.), ul though in "i ■ i" re 

' abuse of this system in respect t<i ■ numb* i of girls end young eronu d 
i't from the sgi i< ultural d ool land into I i and ( !h< si 

1 1 the manufacture] entered into a eontraoi with the *rorkh< 

authority it. mi period. Bu fed, clothed, and lodged the children, and 

llowanc* of money. A. remark ol Mi I to lx iiuoted riir 

1 tail) it ■ l< 1 that 1 m 11 .in 



254 Capitalist Production. 

What experience shows to the capitalist generally is a con- 
stant excess of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the 
momentary requirements of surplus-labour-absorbing capital, 
although this excess is made up of generations of human beL 
stunted, short-lived, swiftly replacing each other, plucked 
to say, before maturity. 1 And, indeed, experience shows to 
intelligent observer with what swiftness and grip the capitalist 
mode of production, dating, historically speaking, only from 
yesterday, has seized the vital power of the people by the very 
root — shows how the degeneration of the industrial population 
is only retarded by the constant absorption of primitive and 
physically uncorrupted elements from the country — shows how 
even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air and the principle 
of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, 

the English cotton trade, the year 1860 stands unparalleled, and that, besides, v 
were exceptionally high. For this extraordinary demand for work had to contend 
with the depopulation of Ireland, with unexampled emigration from the English and 
Scotch agricultural districts to Australia and America, with an actual diminution of 
the population in some of the English agricultural districts, in consequence partly of 
an actual breakdown of the vital force of the labourers, partly of the already effected 
dispersion of the disposable population through the dealers in human flesh. Despite 
all this Mr. Redgrave says: "This kind of labour, however, would only be sought 
after when none other could be procured, for it is a high-priced labour. The ordinary 
wages of a boy of 13 would be about 4s. per week, but to lodge, to clothe, to feed, and to 
provide medical attendance and proper superintendence for 50 or 100 of these boys, and 
to set aside some remuneration for them, could not be accomplished for 4s. ahead per 
week." (Report of the Inspector of Factories for 30th April, I860, p. 27.) Mr. Red- 
grave forgets to tell us how the labourer himself can do all this for his children out 
of their 4s. a-week wages, when the manufacturer cannot do it for the 50 or 100 
children lodged, boarded, superintended all together. To guard against false con- 
clusions from the text, I ought here to remark that the English cotton industry. - 
it was placed under the Factory Act of 1850 with its regulations of labour-time. &c, 
must be regarded as the model industry of England. The English cotton operative is 
in every respect better off than his continental companion in misery. " The Pros 
factory operative labours at least ten hours per week more than his English competi- 
tor, and if employed at his own loom in his own house, his labour is not rest] 
to even those additional hours." (" Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," Oct. 1853, p. 103.) 
grave, the Factory Inspector mentioned above, after the Industrial Exhibition in 1851, 
travelled on the Continent, especially in France and Germany, for the purpose of 
inquiring into the conditions of the factories. Of the Prussian operative he .- 
" He receives a remuneration sufficient to procure the simple fare, and to supply the 

slender comforts to which he has been accustomed he lives upon his C 

fare, and works hard, wherein his position is subordinate to that of the English opera- 
tive." (" Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1858, p. 85.) 

1 The overworked " die off with strange rapidity ; but the places of those who 
perish are instantly filled, and a frequent change of persons makes no alteration in the 
scene." ("England and America." Loi.don, 1833, vol. I, p. 55. Ry E. Ci. Wakefield.) 



The Working Day, 255 

,nd only permits the survival of the strongest, are already be- 
ginning to die off. 1 Capital that has such good reasons for 
enying the sufferings of the legions of workers that surround 
t, is in practice moved as much and as little by the sight of 
he coming degradation and final depopulation of the human 
ace, as by the probable fall of the earth into the sun. Jn every 
tock-jobbing swindle every one knows that some time or other 
he crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall on 
be bead of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the 
bower of gold and placed it in safety. Apres moi le deluge! 
- the watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist 
lation. Hence Capital is reckless of the health or length of 
ife of the labourer, unless under compulsion from society." To 
be outcry as to the physical and mental degradation, the pre- 
uature death, the torture of overwork, it answers : Ought these 
trouble us -since they increase our profits ? But looking at 
kings as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good 
r ill will of the individual capitalist. Free competition brill 
•tit the inherent laws of capitalist production, in the shape of 
xternal coercive laws having power over every individual 
api talis t 

• Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, 

Puhlished in London L864. This report dea dally with the agricultural 

"Sutherland . . . is commonly represented aa a highly improved county 

. hut . . . recent inquiry haa discovered that even there, in districts once famous 

• men and gallant soldiers, the inhabitants have degenerated into a meagre and 

In the healthiest situations, on hill sides fronting the sea, the faces of 

famished children are as pale as they could he in the foul titinospi. 
I. alley." 1 W. 'I'. Thornton. "Ovei population and its remedy. n 1. C, p. 71, 

i syi emble in fact the :;o,imkj ''gallant Highland* rs " whomQlasgow pi n s 

• r in its wynds and closes, with prostitutes and tin. i 

!• ■ though the health of a population is so Important a Cad of the national 

ipital, we ire an iid it must !>•• said thai the olaas of employi i- o! labour have not 

forward to guard and cherish this treasure, . . . The consideration of 

he bruit h of the op< rati vet vras forced upon the mfllownen. ("Times,* November 

th, 1861.) "The men <,t the Weei Riding became the olotbJen of mankind .... 

uth of the workpeople was sacrificed, and the race In a fen generations 1 

ted. But an tin. Lord Shaftesbury*! Bill limited the hoori 

; ''t'il '■< (" Report of the B trai I .. neral," fa « ». tob i L86L) 

^ i • ' , find, t.g. t that in the beginning of I -'•.''. 26 urn 

■ 
'■•r " son,. • " i lompetition with oth | ■< r 

them no voluntary limitation of working time fa children, fee. " Mi. 

■ would not be possible tu prevent thembj 



256 Cap ita list Prod 11 clio n . 

The establishment of a normal working clay is the result 01 
centuries of struggle between capitalist and labourer. Tin 
history of this struggle shows two opposed tendencies. Com 
pare, e.g., the English factory legislation of our time with th< 
English Labour Statutes from the 14-th century to well int. 
the middle of the 18th. 1 Whilst the modern Factory Acta coin 
pulsorily shortened the working-day, the earlier statutes 1 
to lengthen it by compulsion. Of course the pretension^ 
capital in embryo — when, beginning to grow, it secures tlit 
right of absorbing a quantum sujficit of surplus-labour, no 
merely by the force of economic relations, but by the help 
the State — appear very modest when put face to face with th« 
concessions that, orowlinsj and stiwolinor it has to make in it 
adult condition. It takes centuries ere the " free " labourei 
thanks to the development of capitalistic production, agree; 
i.e., is compelled by social conditions, to sell the whole of hi 
active life, his very capacity for work, for the price of tli 
necessaries of life, his birthright for a mess of pottage. Henc 
it is natural that the lengthening of the working day, whic 
capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17t 
century, tries to impose by State-measures on adult labourer 
approximately coincides with the shortening of the workin 
day which, in the second half of the 19th century, has here an 
there been effected by the State to prevent the coining 
children's blood into capital. That which to-day, e.g., in tli 
State of Massachusetts, until recently the freest State of t 
North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the statu to 

scheme of agreement between the manufacturers. . . . Taking all these points ii 
consideration, we have come to the conviction that some legislative enactment 
wanted." (" Children's Employment Comm." Rep. 1., 1803, p. 322.) Mostreceutlj 
much more striking example offers. The rise in the price of cotton during a pei 
of feverish activity, had induced the manufacturers in Blackburn to shorten, 
mutual consent, the working-time in their mills during a certain fixed period. 1 
period terminated about the end of November, 1871. Meanwhile, the wealth 
manufacturers, who combined spinning with weaving, used the diminution of prodi 
tion resulting from this agreement;, to extend their own business and thus to DM 
great profits at the expense of the small employers. The latter thereupon turned 
their extremity to the operatives, urged them earnestly to agitate for the ( J hoi 
system, and promised contributions in money to this end. 

1 The Labour Statutes, the like of which were enacted at the same time in Fran 
the Netherlands, and elsewhere, were first formally repeal •! in England in 1813, k 
after the changes in methods of production had rendered them obsolete. 



The Working Day. 257 

imit of the labour of children under 12, was in England, even 
a the middle of the 17th century, the normal working-day of 
ible-bodied artizans, robust labourers, athletic blacksmiths. 1 

The first " Statute of Labourers " (23 Edward III., 1349) 
:ound its immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of 
his kind lasts centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) 
n the great plague that decimated the people, so that, as a Tory 
writer says, " The difficulty of getting men to work on reason- 
ible terms (i.e., at a price that left their employers a reasonable 
juantity of surplus-labour) grew to such a height as to be quite 
utolerable." 8 Reasonable wages were, therefore, fixed by law 
us well as the limits of the working day. The latter point, the 
>nly one that here interests us, is repeated in the Statute of 
1496 Henry VllL). The working day for all artificers and 
ield labourers from March to September ought, according to 
his statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last from 
> in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. But the 
Deal times consist of 1 hour for breakfast, 1\ hours for dinner, 
tml \ an hour for " noon-meate," i.e., exactly twice as much as 
inder the factory acts now in force. 3 In winter, work was to 

1 " No child under 12 years of age shall be employed in any manufacturing estab- 

ishment more than 10 hours in one day." General Statutes of Massachusetts, GS, 

li. VI. (The various Statute! were pawed between L836and L868.) "Labour pcr- 

onat d during a period of 10 hours on any day in all cotton, woollen, silk, paper, 

(lass, and flax factori b, or in manufactories of iron and brass, shall be considered a 

• lay's labour. And be it enacted, that hereafter no minor engaged in any faotorj 

ball be bolden or required bo work more than 1" hours in any day, .>i 60 hoars In any 

reek ; and that hereafter no minor shall be admitted as i srorkec under the age of 

im in any factory within this State." State of NewJei • ■ . An Art to limit. 

of labour, &c, 61 and 62. (Law of llth March, is:.:,.) u No minor who has 

• ol L2 years, and is under the age of L6 yean, shall be employed in 

my n ring establishment n than II boms in an j one day, nor before B 

ok in the morning, nor after 7.".<> in tin- evening." (" Revised Statute* of the 
State of Rhode Island, fco., oh. 39, §23, 1st July, L867.) 

»" Sophisms of Free Trade." 7th lid. London, 1860, p. 205. Dth Ed., p. 253. This 
iame Tory, Hi"! Imits that " Lets of Parliament regulating srages, bul 

''■"''" ' and in favour of the master, la tc<! foi the long period of n;i\,.u- 
Population grew. These laws were then found, and reeJly became, unn 
.■li. 1. 1, iome." (1. .-., p. 206. ) 
1 In reference to this statute, •'. Wade with truth r. i " Prom the il I 

trd to the statute) it appeal that in 1406 the die! d lend 

one third oi the income of an and one half the Un 

*hich ind tilth tit of ini]e|M-iidi I ng the wm king « !.i • - . 

Am prevails at present j foi the board, both ol frbon r cri and artM 

I 



25S Capitalist Production. 

last from 5 in the morning until dark, with the same interval 
A statute of Elizabeth of 1562 leaves the length of the worl 
ing Jay for all labourers " hired for daily or weekly wage " ui 
touched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2-- hours in tl 
summer, or to 2 in the winter. Dinner is only to last 1 h. u 
and the " afternoon-sleep of half an hour " is only allows 
between the middle of Ma}' and the middle of August. i\ 
every hour of absence Id. is to be subtracted from the wag 
In practice, however, the conditions were much more favourab 
to the labourers than in the statute-book. William Pettv, tl: 
father of political econourv, and to some extent the founder 1 
Statistics, says in a work that he published in the last third 1 
the 17th century: "Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourer 
work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz., 
a day for working days, and 2 on Sundays ; whereby it is plaj 
that if they could fast on Fryday nights, and dine in one hoi 
and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to one; therel 
this working h more, and spending oV l ess > the above-mei 
tioned (tax) might be raised." 1 Was not Dr. Andrew Ure ri( 
in crying down the 12 hours' bill of 1833 as a retrogression 
the times of the dark a^es ? It is true, these regulations c< 
tained in the statute mentioned by Petty, apply also to a 
prentices. But the condition of child-labour, even at the 
of the 17th century, is seen from the following complai] 
" 'Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this kii 
dom, to bind an apprentice for seven years ; three or fom 
their common standard : and the reason is, because they 
educated from their cradle to something of employment, whi 
renders them the more apt and docile, and consequently the m 
capable of attaining to a ripeness and quicker proficiency 
business. Whereas our youth, here in England, being bred 
nothing before they come to be apprentices, make a very si 

be reckoned at a much higher proportion of their wages." (J. Wade, " History of 
Middle and Working Classes," p. 24, 25, and 577.) The opinion that this ditioronc 
due to the difference in the price-relations between food and clothing then and 
is refuted by the most cursory glance at " Chronicon Pretiosum, fco." By Bk 
Fleetwood. 1st Ed., London, 1707; 2d Ed., London, 17-15. 

» W. Petty, " Political Anatomy of Ireland, Verbum Sapienti," 1072. KM. 1 
p. 10. 



The Working Day. 259 

progress and require much longer time wherein to reach the 
perfection of accomplished artists." 1 

Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the 
epoch of Modern Industry and machinism, capital in England 
had not succeeded in seizing for itself, by the payment of the 
weekly value of labour-power, the whole week of the labourer 
with the exception, however, of the agricultural labourers. 
The fact that they could live for a whole week on the wage of 
four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient reason 
that they should work the other two days for the capitalist. 
One party of English economists, in the interest of capital, de- 
nounces this obstinacy in the most violent manner, another 
party defends the labourers. Let us listen, e.g., to the contest 
between Postlethwayt whose Dictionary of Trade then had the 
Mme reputation as the kindred works of M'Culloch and 
lf<Gregor to-day, and the author (already quoted) of the 
" Essay on Trade and Commerce." 

'"A Discourse on the necessity of encouraging Mechanick Industry," London, 
p. 13. Macaulay, who h;is falsified English history in the interest of the Whigs 
iml the bourgeoisie, declares as follows : " The practice of setting children prematurely 
to work .... prevailed in the 17th century to an extent which, when compared 
with the extent of the manufacturing system, seems almost incredible. At Norwich, 
khe'ehief s. at of the clothing trade, a little creature of six years old was thought tit 
or labour. Several writers of that time, and among them some who were considered 
u eminently benevolent, mention with exultation the fact that in that single city, 
boya and ^irls of verytendei ag< c reat e wealth exceeding wharf wai aeoeeaaryfoi 
khejf own subsistence by twelve thousand pound* a year. The more carefully we 
ne the history of the past, the more reason .shall we find to dissent from those 
aho imagine tl e has been fruitful of new social evils That which is 

the intelligence and the humanity which remedies tin in." (" History of Kng 

»*d, rol. i., p. 419.) Macaulay might have reported further that "extremely 
»eIl-di*posed " amis du commera in the 17th century, narrate with "exultation 

tow m ■ poorhouse in Holland e child of four was employed, and that this example 

4 it rlii I.,,,, en pratiqw " passes muster in all the humanitarian works, ./ In Ma.au- 
■ the time Of Adam Smith. It is true that with the lubef it ution of manula. t ui .• 

" r hand 1. 1 exploitation of children begin to appear. This, rploitation 

tin extenl among peasants, and was the more developed, the 
i the yoke pressing on the husbandman. The tendency of capital ia there ui 
nutakahly ; but the facta thcmaelvoa are etfll aa isolated aj the phenomena of tare 
>at4ed children. Bence they wen noted "with exultation* as especially wo; 

md as won. I. is by the far seeing " <tiiu.< '/" r,.iiiin> r<; ," and 1 < coiuin. nd. | 

i for their own time and for posterity. This same Bootoh sycophant and fine 

SiaST, Macaulay, Kays : " Wehcai to day only of 1 1 1 1 Djgl I laiotl and see only pi. ,.. 
and . sp. eially what eats ! 

aJ> of the workpeople, the most angry is the anonymous antl 

|U0ted in tin- t- \n l-irtHay on tia<b and couiiu- n e, Oontah 



26o Capitalist Production. 

Postlethwayt says among other things : " We cannot }>ut ; 
end to those few observations, without noticing that trite r 
mark in the mouth of too many ; that if the industrious pi 
can obtain enough to maintain themselves in five days, tin 
will not work the whole six. Whence they infer the necessii 
of even the necessaries of life being made dear by taxes, <>r ai 
other means, to compel the working artizan and manufactm 
to labour the whole six days in the week, without ceasing. 
must beer leave to differ in sentiment from those am 
politicians, who contend for the perpetual slavery of the w.»r 
ing people of this kingdom ; they forget the vulgar adi 
work and no play. Have not the English boasted of the i 
genuity and dexterity of her working artists and manufacture] 
which have heretofore given credit and reputation to Britj 
wares in general ? What has this been owin^ to ? To nothii 
more probably than the relaxation of the working people 
their own way. Were the} T obliged to toil the year round, tl 
whole six days in the week, in a repetition of the same vroj 
might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them stupid i 
stead of alert and dexterous ; and might not our workmen K 
their reputation instead of maintaining it by such eter 
slavery ? . . . . And what sort of workmanship could we 
pcet from such hard-driven animals ? . . . . Many of th 
will execute as much work in four days as a Frenchman wil 
five or six. But if Englishmen are to be eternal drudg - 
to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen, 
our people are famed for bravery in war, do we not say tha 
is owing to good English roast beef and pudding in their belli 
as well as their constitutional spirit of liberty ? And why in 
not the superior ingenuity and dexterity of our artists 

Taxation, &c, London, 1770. " He had already dealt with this subject in his el 
work: "Considerations on Taxes." London, 170."">. On the same Bide to I 
Polonius Arthur Young, the unutterable statistical prattler. Among the defei 
of the working classes the foremost are : Jacob Vanderlint, in: " Money ai 
things." London, 17'M ; the Rev. Nathaniel Forster, D.D., in "' An Enquiry inu 
Causes of the Present Price of Provisions,'* London, 17f>G ; Lu Price, ami 
Postlethwayt, as well in the supplement to his "Universal Dictionary of Trade 
Commerce/' as in his "Great Britain's Commercial Interest explained and 
proved." 2nd Edition, 17"). The facts themselves are confirmed by many 
writers of the time, among others by Josiah Tucker. 



The Working Day. 261 

nanufactures, be owing to that freedom and liberty to direct 
bemselves in their own way, and I hope we shall never have 
hem deprived of such privileges and that good living from 
vhence their ingenuity no less than their courage may pro- 
eed." 1 Thereupon the author of the "Essay on Trade and 
Commerce" replies : " \i the making of every seventh day an 
loliday is supposed to be of divine institution, as it implies 
he appropriating the other six days to labour" (he means 
•apital as we shall soon see) " surely it will not be thought 
•ruel to enforce it ... . That mankind in general, are 
laturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience 

be true, from the conduct of our manufacturing populace, 
.vho do not labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, 
inless provisions happen to be very dear Put all the 

ssaries of the poor under one denomination; for instance, 
•all them all wheat, or suppose that .... the bushel of wheat 
.hall cost five shillings and that he (a manufacturer) earns 

1 shilling by his labour, he then would be obliged to work 
ive days only in a week. If the bushel of wheat should cost 
nit four shillings, he would be obliged to work but four days ; 
nt as wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to 
Km price of necessaries. . . . the manufacturer, who labours four 

has a surplus of money to live idle with the rest of the 

*eek .... I hope I have said enough to make it appear 

bat (he moderate labour of six days in a week is no slavery. 

Mr labouring people do this, and to all appearance are the 

lappiest of all our labouring poor, 1 but the Dutch do this in 

nanufactures, and appear to be a very happy peopla The 

rench do so, when holidays do not inten ene. 1 But ourpopu- 

have adopted a notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy 

1 birthright privilege of being more free and independent than 

wry country in Europe. Now this idea, as far as it m 

t the hravery of our troops, may be of some use ; bu( the 

1 Poftlethwayt, 1. <•., " Pli t ]•,, [\min u j I H • ow • p 1 l. 

' "Ai, I '\. '. II' bin • •! i-l.it.^ on p. '.Mi .vli. niii tin- " tiii]ipiiM'Kn " of 

mi.iI In.. mi, i already in 1770 consi bed. " Thai] | 

b stretch, the) cannot live oheapei than the] 'I", w<n k hardar.' 

b) ohangii .ill th< traditional bolida/i into wori , 

.'UjTi an important pal tint il. 



262 Capitalist Production. 

Less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better for 
themselves and for the State. The labouring people should 
never think themselves independent of their superiors. . . . 
It is extremely dangerous to encourage mobs in a commercial 
state like ours, where, perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the 
whole, are people with little or no property. The cure will 
not be perfect, till our manufacturing poor are contented t< 
labour six days for the same sum which they now earn in four 
days." To this end, and for" extirpating idleness, debauchery 
and excess," promoting a spirit of industry, " lowering the price 
of labour in our manufactories, and easing the lands of the 
heavy burden of poor's rates," our " faithful Eckart " of capital 
proposes this approved device:- to shut up such labourer- 
become dependent on public support, in a word, paupers, in 
" an ideal tvorkhouse." Such ideal workhouse must be made a 
" House of Terror," and not an asylum for the poor, " where they 
are to be plentifully fed, warmly and decently clothed, and where 
they do but little work." 2 In this " House of Terror," this 
"ideal workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day 
allowing proper time for meals, in such manner that there shal 
remain 12 hours of neat-labour." 3 

Twelve working hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in tin 
" House of Terror " of 1770 ! 63 years later, in 1833, when th 
English Parliament reduced the working day for children I 
13 to 18, in four branches of industry to 12 full hours, tli 
judgment day of English Industry had dawned ! In 185! 
when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his position with th 
bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working day, tin 
French people cried out with one voice "the law that limit: 
the working day to 12 hours is the one good that has remains* 
to us of the legislation of the Republic ! " 4 At Zurich the worl 

1 " An Essay," &c, p. 15, 41, 90, 97, 55, 57, G9.— Jacob Vanderlint, as early as 17.° 
declared that the secret of the out-cry of the capitalists as to the laziness of tl 
working people was simply that they claimed for the same wages days' laboi 
instead of 4. 

•- 1. c. p. 2 12. 

"• 1. c. " The French," he says, " laugh at our enthusiastic ideas of liberty." I. c.p. 7: 

4 "They especially objected to work beyond the 12 hours per day, because the la 
which fixed those hours, is the only good which remains to them of the legislation < 
the Republic" ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact," Slst October, 1856, p. SO.) The Free* 
Twelve hours' Dill of September ath, 1850, a bourgeois edition of the decree of th 



The Working Day. 263 

»f children over 10, is limited to 12 Lours ; in Aargau in 186*2, 
he work of children between 13 and 16, was reduced from 
2J to 12 hours; in Austria in 1860, for children between 14 
.nd 16, the same reduction was made. 1 " What a progress," since 
770 ! Macaulay would shout with exultation ! 

The " House of Terror " for paupers of which the capitalistic 
,oul of 1770 only dreamed, was realized a few years later in the 
hape of a gigantic " Workhouse " for the industrial worker 
limself. It is called the Factory. And the ideal this time 
ades before the reality. 



■ ECTION' 0. — THE STRUGGLE FOR THE NORMAL WORKING DAY. COMPULSORY 
LIMITATION BY LAW OF THE WORKING TIME. THE ENGLISH FACTORY 

a .is, 1833 to 1804. 

After capital had taken centuries in extending the working- 
lay to its normal maximum limit, and then beyond this to the 
i in it of the natural day of 12 hours, 2 there followed on the 
birth of machinism and modern industry in the last third of 

Provisional Government of March 2nd, 1848, holds in all workshop! without exceptions. 
Before this law the working day in France was without definite limit. It lasted in 
the factories 14, 15, or more hours. See " Des classes ouvricres en France, pendant 
L848. Par M. Blanqui." M. Blanqui the economist, not the Revolutionist, had 
■ • n entrusted by the Government with an Inquiry into the condition of the work- 
ing class. 

I. Igium is the model hourgeois state in regard to the regulation of the working 
!ay. Lord Howard of Welden, English Plenipotentiary ;»t Brussels, reports to the 
n Office, May 12th, 18G2 : "M. Rogier, the minister, informed me that 
children's labour is limited neither hy a general law nor hy any looal regulations; 
that the Government, during the last threi years, Intended In svery session to pro- 
pose a bill on the subject, hut always found an Insuperable obstacle In the jealous 
ition to any legislation in contradiction with the principle of perfect freedom of 
labotu . 

It is certainly much bo be regretted thai any class of persons should toil 12 hours 

i day which, including the time for their meali and fox going to and returning from 

work, amounts, in fact, to 1 1 of the 24 hoars .... Without entering Into the 

• 'tli, no one one will h< litate, 1 think, t<> admit that, m fl Moral | 

» entire an absorption of the time of the workii . without intermission, 

the early age of 18, and In tradei not subjoot to restriction, much youngi r, must 

tremely prejudicial, and Is an evil greatly to be deplored .... For the 

<>f public morals, of bringing up an orderly population, i the 

t body of the pcoph a reasonable enjoyment of life, it is much to bi d< •• • 

in all trades some portion of ever) working day should I vi I and leisure, M 

(Leonui.i Uornei In Reports of [nap, of rV t., Dei . LML) 



264 Capitalist Production. 

the 18th century, a violent encroachment like that of an 
avalanche in its intensity and extent. All bounds of m< 
and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. 
Even the ideas of day and night, of rustic simplicity in the old 
statutes, became so confused that an English judge, as late ax 
I860, needed a quite Talmudic sagacity to explain "judicially' 
what was day and what was night. 1 Capital celebrated 
orgies. 

As soon as the working class, stunned at first by the noise 
and turmoil of the new system of production, recovered, in 
some measure, its senses, its resistance began, and first in the 
native land of machinism, in England. For 30 years, however 
the concessions conquered by the workpeople were purely 
nominal. Parliment passed 5 Labour Laws between 1802 and 
1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for theii 
carrying out, for the requisite officials, &c. a 

They remained a dead letter. " The fact is, that prior to the 
Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all night 
all day, or both ad libitum" 3 

A normal working day for modern industry only dates fron 
the Factory Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool, flax, an< 
silk factories. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit 
capital than the history of the English Factory Acts from 1^3* 
to 1864. 

The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working day t 
be from half-past five in the morning to half-past eight in tli 
evening, and within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is law 
ful toemploy young persons (i.e., persons between 13 and IS yefl 

1 See "Judgment of Mr. J. H. Otwey, Belfast. Hilary Sessions, County Antrin 
I860." 

2 It is very characteristic of the regime of Louis Philippe, the bourgeois king, th 
the one Factory Act passed during his reign, that of March 22nd, 1841, was nev 
put in force. And this law only dealt with child-labour. It fixed 8 hours a day I 
children betwt en 8 and 12, 12 hours for children between 12 and 10, &c, with mai 
exceptions which allow night-work even for children 8 years old. The supervise 
and enforcement of this law are, in a country where every mouse is under poli 
administration, left to the good-will of the amis du commerce. Only since 185 
in one single department — the DCpartement du Nord — has a paid government i imped 
been appointed. Not less characteristic of the development of French societ 
generally, is the fact, thai Ixmis Philippe's law stood solitary among the all-embiaci 
mass of French laws, till the Revolution of 1848. 

3 "Report of Insp. of Fact.,*' 30th April, 1800, p. 50. 



The Working Day. 265 

f age), at any time of the day, provided no one individual 
(rang person .should work more than 12 hours in any one day, 
xcept in certain cases especially provided for. The 6th section 
if the Act provided : " That there shall be allowed in the course 
f every day not less than one and a half hours for meals to 
very such person restricted as hereinbefore provided." The 
mployment of children under 1), with exceptions mentioned 
ater, was forbidden; the work of children between 9 and AW 
limited to 8 hours a day, night work, i.e., according to this 
Vet, work between 8.30 p.m. and 5.30 a.m., was forbidden for 
.11 person^ b< 'tween 9 and 18. 

The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the 

lorn of capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as they 

ailed it, " the freedom of labour," that they created a special 

ystem in order to prevent the Factory Acts from having a 

equence so outrageous. 

"The groat evil of the factory system as at present con- 
lucted," Bays the first report of the Central Board of the Com- 
nission of June 28th, 1833, " has appeared to us to be that it 
ntails the necessity of continuing the labour of children to 
lie utmost length of that of the adults. The only remedy for 
his evil, short of tie- limitation of the labour of adults, which 

wold, in our opinion, create an evil greater than that which is 

OOght to b<> remedied, appears to be the plan of working 

louble sets of children." . . . Under the name of System 

I Relays, this " plan " was therefore carried out, bo that, - 

5.30 am. until 1.30 in tie- afternoon, one set of children 

reen 9 and 13, and from I'M) p.m. to 8.80 in tin- evening 
mother set were " put to," &c. 
In order t<> reward the manufacturers i'^v having, in the 

• barefaced way, Ignored all the Acts ;i^ to children's labour 

ed dining the last twenty-two yean, the pill was 
urther gilded for them. Parliament decreed that after March 
1st, L834, no child under LI, after March 1st, 1835, no child 
under 12, and after March l-t, is:;o, no child under l' ; wa 

. more than eight hours in a factory. This "liberalism." 
• full of consideration for "capital/' wai the more uoteworthy 

Di l s.i a. Carliale, Sir B. Bi Sir Q B< II, ' 



266 Capitalist Production. 

Guthrie, &c, in a word, the most distinguished physicians and 
surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before the 
House of Commons, that there was danger in delay. Dr. 
Farre expressed himself still more coarsely. " Legislation fa 
necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in which it 
can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e., the factory 
method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of inflicting it " 

That same " reformed " Parliament, which in its delicate con- 
sideration for the manufacturers, condemned children under 13, 
for years to come, to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory 
Hell, on the other hand, in the Emancipation Act, which i 
administered freedom drop by drop, forbade the planters, from 
the outset, to work any negro slave more than 45 hours a 
week. 

But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agitation 
that went on for several years. It turned chiefly on the age of 
those who, under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours 
work, and were subject to a certain amount of compulsory 
education. According to capitalistic anthropology, the age of 
childhood ended at 10, or at the outside, at 11. The more 
nearly the time approached for the coming into full force o 
the Factory Act, the fatal year 1836, the more wildly raged 
the mob of manufacturers. They managed, in fact, to intimidate 
the government to such an extent that in 1835 it proposed to 
lower the limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. In the 
meantime the pressure from without grew more threatening. 
Courage failed the House of Commons. It refused to throw 
children of 13 under the Juggernaut Car of capital for mor 
than 8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into full operatic! 
It remained unaltered until June, 1844. 

In the ten years during which it regulated factory work- 
first in part, and then entirely, the official reports of the factor) 
inspectors teem with complaints as to the impossibility 
putting the Act into force. As the law of 1833 left it option! 
with the lords of capital during the 15 hours, from 5.o0 a.m. fa 
8.30 p.m., to make every " young person," and "every child 
begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8 hours at an; 
moment they liked, and also permitted them to assign t< 



The Working Day. 267 

lifferent persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen 
;oon discovered a new " system of relays," by which the labour- 
lorses were not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly 
-e-harnessed at changing stations. We do not pause longer on 
:he beauty of this system, as we shall have to return to it later. 
But this much is clear at the first glance : that this system 
mnulled the whole Factory Act, not only in the spirit, but in 
the letter. How could factory inspectors, with this complex 
book-keeping in respect to each individual child or young 
person, enforce the legally determined work time and the 
granting of the legal meal-times ? In a great many of the 
factories, the old brutalities soon blossomed out again un- 
punished. In an interview with the Home Secretary (1844), 
the factory inspectors demonstrated the impossibility of any 
control under the newly invented relay system. 1 In the mean- 
time, however, circumstances had greatly changed. The factory 
hands, especially since 1838, had made the Ten Hours' Bill their 
sconomical, as they had made the Charter their political, 
jlection-cry. Some of the manufacturers, even, who had 
managed their factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, 
overwhelmed Parliament with memorials on the immoral com- 
petition of their false brethren whom greater impudence, or 
more fortunate local circumstances, enabled to break the law. 
Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might 
give the rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and 
political leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change 
"1" fronl and of speech towards the workpeople. They had 
entered upon the contest for the repeal of the Coin Laws, and 
needed the workers to help them to victory. They promised, 
therefore, not only a double-sized Loaf of bread, but the enact- 
ment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free Trade millenium. 1 Thus 
they still less dared to oppose a measure intended only bo make 
the law of is:;:; a reality. Threatened in their holiest inter 
the rent of land, the Tories thundered with philanthropic in- 
dignation against the "nefarious practices "' of their foes, 

■ " Rept. of [nip. ol I .„ | , ;;i ,| . », :,,!„,. LS4&, y. & 
pt. ol [0 p ol 31ft Oetob 1. L848, p 

i Homei uses the expression u nefarious pi In ln-> ofll 

( M Beport ol ii I t , ' :;i t October, I860, p. 7.) 



2 6S Capitalist Production. 

This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 
7th, 1844. It came into effect on September 10th, 1844. 1: 
places under protection a new category of workers, viz., the 
women over 18. They were placed in every respect on the 
same footing as the young persons, their work time Limited U> 
twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, Szc. For the first 
time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and 
officially the labour of adults. In the Factory Report of 1844- 
1845, it is said with irony : "No instances have come to my 
knowledge of adult women having expressed any regret at 
their rights being thus far interfered with." 1 The working time 
of children under 13 was reduced to GJ, and in certain circum- 
stances to 7 hours a-day. 2 

To get rid of the abuses of the " spurious relay-system," the 
law established besides others the following important regula- 
tions : — " That the hours of work of children and young persons 
shall be reckoned from the time when any child or young 
person shall begin to work in the morning." So that it A 
e.g., begins work at 8 in the morning, and B at 10, B's work- 
day must nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. " The 
time shall be regulated by a public clock," for example, tin 
nearest railway clock, by which the factory clock is to be se 
The occupier is to hang up a " legible " printed notice statin 
the hours for the beginning and ending of work and the time 
allowed for the several meals. Children beginning work befor 
12 noon may not be again employed after 1 p.m. The aite 
noon shift must therefore consist of other children than the* 
employed in the morning. Of the hour and a half for me; 
times, "one hour thereof at the least shall be given befor 
three of the clock in the afternoon. . . . and at the saui 
period of the day. No child or young person shall be employe* 
more than five hours before 1 p.m. without an interval for mea 
time of at least 30 minutes. No child or young person [o 
female] shall be employed or allowed to remain in any room ii 
which any manufacturing process is then [t.e., at meal time* 
carried on," &c. 

1 " Rept.," &c, 30th Sept., 1844, p. 15. 

2 The Act allows children to be employed for 10 hours if they do not work day afti 
day, but only on alternate days. In the main, this clause remained inoperative. 



The Working Day. 269 

It has been seen that these minutiae, whieh, with military 
uniformity, regulate by stroke of the clock the times, limits, 
pauses of the woik, were not at all the products of Parlia- 
mentary fancy. They developed gradually out of circum- 
stances as natural laws of the modern mode of production. 
Their formulation, official recognition, and proclamation by the 
State, were the result of a lon^ struggle of classes. One of 
their first consequences was that in practice the working day 
of the adult males in factories became subject to the same 
limitations, since in most processes of production the co-opera- 
tion of the children, young persons, and women is indispens- 
able. On the whole, therefore, during the period from 1844 
to 1S47, the 12 hours' working day became general and 
uniform in all branches of industry under the Factory Act. 

The manufacturers, however, did not allow this " progress " 
without a compensating " retrogression.' 1 At their instigation 
the House of Commons reduced the minimum age for exploit- 
able children from to 8, in order to assure that additional 
BUpply of factory children which is due to capitalists, accord- 
ing to divine and human law. 1 

The y<ars 184G-47 are epoch-making in the economic history 
of England. The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the duties 
en cotton and other raw material ; free trade proclaimed as the 
guiding Btar of legislation ; in a word, the arrival of the inil- 
lenium. On the other hand, in the same years, the Chartist 
movement and the 10 hours' agitation reached their highest 
point. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge. 
Despite the fanatical opposition of the army of perjured Fi 
traders, with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours 1 
Hill, struggled for so long, wenl through Parliament. 

The new Factory Act of June 8th, L847, enacted that <>n 

.July 1st, 1847, there should he a preliminary shortening of the 

working day lor •young persons" (from L3 to L8), and all 

ales to II hours, hot that on May Let, 1848, there should 

b definite limitation of the working day to 10 hours. In 

Asa reduction in their boura <<f work would cause • largei Dumber (of ohildrei ) 
thought that tin- additional rapplj «»t ohUdren from B to 'J 

'•111. I 111. . | 0; :..| " (I.e., D, I 



270 Capitalist Production. 

other respects, the Act only amended and completed the A 
of 1833 and 1844. 

Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in oi 
to binder the Act from coming into full force on May 1st, 1848 
And the workers themselves, under the pretence that they had 
been taught by experience, were to help in the destruction of 
their own work. The moment was cleverly chosen. M It must 
be remembered, too, that there has been more than two ye 
of great suffering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of l v 
47) among the factory operatives, from many mills having 
worked short time, and many being altogether closed. A con- 
siderable number of the operatives must therefore be in very 
narrow circumstances ; many, it is to be feared, in debt ; so 
that it might fairly have been presumed that at the pres 
time they would prefer working the longer time, in ordei 
make up for past losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their 
furniture out of pawn, or replace that sold, or to get a new 
supply of clothes for themselves and their families." 1 

The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of 
these circumstances by a general reduction of wages by 1" . 
This was done, so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the 
new Free Trade era. Then followed a further reduction of 
as soon as the working day was shortened to 11, and a reduc- 
tion of double that amount as soon as it was finally shortened 
to 10 hours. Wherever, therefore, circumstances allowed it. a 
reduction of wages of at least 25°/ took place. 2 Under suck 
favourably prepared conditions the agitation among the factory 
workers for the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun. Neithei 
lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. But all 
was in vain. Concerning the half-dozen petitions in whicl 
workpeople were made to complain of " their oppression bj 
the Act," the petitioners themselves declared under oral ex 
amination, that their signatures had been extorted from them, 
" They felt themselves oppressed, but not exactly by the 

1 " Rep. of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1848, p. 16. 

2 " I found that men who had been getting 10s. a week, had had Is. taken off fc 
a reduction in the rate of 10 per cent, and Is. 6d. off the remaining 9s. for the reduc- 
tion in time, together 2s. 6d., and notwithstanding this, many of them said tiny 
would rather work 10 hours." 1. c. 



The Working Day. 271 

factory Act." 1 Bat if the manufacturers did not succeed in 
uaking the workpeople speak as they wished, they them- 
elves shrieked all the louder in press and Parliament in the 
iame of the workpeople. They denounced the Factory 
nspectors as a kind of revolutionary commissioners like those 
f the French National Convention ruthlessly sacrificing the 
mhappy factory workers to their humanitarian crotchet. This 
nanceuvre also failed. Factory Inspector Leonard Horner 
onducted in his own person, and through his sub-inspectors, 
jiany examinations of witnesses in the factories of Lancashire. 
Vbout 70°/ o of the workpeople examined declared in favour 
>f 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in favour of 11, and an 
Itogetber insignificant minority for the old 12 hours. 2 

Another "friendly" dodge was to make the adult males 
.vork 12 to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as 
he best proof of what the proletariat desired in its heart of 
ieart& But the "ruthless" Factory Inspector Leonard Horner 
again to the fore. The majority of the "over-timers" 
leclared : "They would much prefer working ten hours for 
ess wages, but that they had no choice ; that so many were 
mt of employment (so many spinners getting very low wages 
by having to work as piecers, being unable to do better), that 
f they refused bo work the longer time, others would immedi- 
ately get their places, so that it was a question with them of 
1 work the long time, or of being thrown out of 
employment altogether." 3 

The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and 
tin: Ten Bours' Act came into force May 1st, L848. But mean- 
while the fiasco of the Chartist party whose leaders were 

"'Hi'. ned it [the [K tit ion], 1 said at tin- time I waa putting my hand t<> a 

thing.' "Flu n why did yon put year hand to it? ' 'Became I ahoold 1 

■I "ir if 1 li,i<i it-fused.' Whence it would appeal that this petitionex fell 

• If " oppn Med,' hut not exactly hy the I'aetory Art.'' 1. c. p, L02, 

17, 1. c. In Mr. Hoi ner's district 10,270 adult male laboven w. re thus 

uatjrfaad mi km faetoriea Their evidence is to he found in the apptndii bo the 
v Eleporta foi the half-year ending Oetobex 1848, Theae ezaminationa farniah 
■ ihialile material in othi r « ■ nnexioni aleo, 

oUeeted by Leonard Homat himaelf, rfoa ••''. 7". 7i 
illected hy Bnfa [napeetoc A.. No* 51, 68, 
ilix. One manufacturer, too, telli the plain 1 1 nth. Bet So, 11, an 



Capitalist Production . 






imprisoned, and whoso organisation was dismembered, ha 

shaken the confidence of the English working class in it 
strength. Soon after this the June insurrections in Paris an 
its bloody suppression united, in England as on the Continea 
all fractions of the ruling classes, landlords and capitalist 
stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists an 
Free-traders, government and opposition, priests and fre« 
thinkers, young whores and old nuns, under the common ci 
for the salvation of Property, Religion, the Family an 
Society. The working class was everywhere proclaims 
placed under a ban, under a virtual law of suspects. Tl 
manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain themselve 
They broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten I 
Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 182 
had aimed at restricting in some measure the " free " exploit 
tion of labour-power. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in mini; 
ture, carried on for over two years with a cynical reckles 
a terrorist energy all the cheaper because the rebel capitali: 
risked nothing except the skin of his " hands." 

To understand that which follows we must remember t 
the Factory Acts of 1833, 1844-, and 1S47 were all three 
force so far as the one did not amend the other : that not o 
of these limited the working day of the male worker over 
and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 |i 
had remained the legal " day," within the limits of whi 
at first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of yoo 
persons and women had to be performed under the prescril 
conditions. 

The manufacturers began by here and there discharging 
part of, in many cases half of, the young persons and wom 
employed by them, and then, for the adult males, restofj 
the almost obsolete night-work. The Ten Hours' Act, th 
cried, leaves no other alternative. 1 

Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for me; 

Let us hear the Factory Inspectors. " Since the restriction 

the hours of work to ten, the factory occupiers mainta 

although they have not yet practically gone the whole long 

1 Reports, fee., for 31st October, 1848, p. 133, 134 



The Working Day. 273 

that supposing the hours of work to be from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m., 
they fulfil the provisions of the statutes by allowing an hour 
before 9 a.m. and half-an-hour after 7 p.m. [for meals]. In 
some cases they now allow an hour, or half an hour for dinner, 
insisting at the same time, that they are not bound to allow 
any part of the hour and a half in the course of the factory 
working-day." 1 The manufacturers maintained therefore that 
the scrupulously strict provisions of the Acts of 1844 with 
regard to meal times only gave the operatives permission to eat 
and drink before coming into, and after leaving the factory — 
i.e., at home. And why should not the workpeople eat their 
dinner before 9 in the morning ? The crown lawyers, how- 
ever, decided that the prescribed meal times " must be in the 
interval during the working hours, and that it will not be 
lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, from 9 a.m. to 7 
p.m., without any interval." 2 

After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its 
revolt by a step which agreed with the letter of the law of 
1844, and was therefore legal. 

The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 

1 pin. of such children, from 8 to 13, as had been employed 
before noon. But it did not regulate in any way the G£ 
hours' work of the children whose work-time began at 12 mid- 
day or later. Children of 8 might, if they began work at noon, 

mployed from 12 to 1, 1 hour ; from 2 to 4 in the afternoon, 

2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3i hours; in all, the 
legal oM hours. Or better still. In order to make their work 

Qcide with that of the adult male' labourers up to 8.30 p.m., 
manufacturers <>nly had to give them no work till '2 in the 
rnoon ; they could then keep them in the factory without 

intermission till 8.30 in the evening. u And it is now expressly 
admitted that the practice exists in England from the desire 
ol mill-owners to have their machinery at work fox more than 
10 hours a-d.-iy, to keep the children at work with male 
after all the young persons and women have 1 < • t"t v 
: until 8.30 p.m., if the factory-ownen cl Workmen 

1 fc ports, fee., be 801b April, L848, p, »:. 
■ Report*, I Lil <>, kobi r, LS4S, p. 130. 

i K'i">i t *. 'vc, !...]>. 1 ]% 



274 Capitalist Production. 

and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral ground-, 
but Capital answered : 

44 My deeds upon my head ! I crave the law, 
The penalty and forfeit of my bond." 

In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Com- 
mons on July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July 15th, 
1850, 3,742 children were subjected to this " practice " in 257 
factories. 1 Still, this was not enough. The lynx eye of 
Capital discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5 hours 
work before mid-day without a pause of at least 30 minutes for 
refreshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind for work after 
mid-day. Therefore, it claimed and obtained the enjoyment 
not only of making children of 8 drudge without intermission 
from 2 to 8.30 p.m., but also of making them hunger during 

that time. 

" A y, his heart, 
So says the bond." 2 

This Shy lock -clinging to the letter of the law of 1844, so far 
as it regulated children's labour, was but to lead up to an open 
revolt against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour o 
" young persons and women." It will be remembered that the 
abolition of the M false relay system " was the chief aim am 
object of that law. The masters began their revolt with the 
simple declaration that the sections of the Act of 1844 which 
prohibited the ad libitum use of young persons and women ii 
such short fractions of the day of 15 hours as the employe 
chose, were " comparatively harmless " so long as the work 
time was fixed at 12 hours. But under the Ten Hours' Ac 
they were a " grievous hardship." 3 They informed the in- 

1 Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1850, pp. 5, 6. 

2 The nature of capital remains the same in its developed as in its undevelop 
form. In the code which the influence of the slave-owners, shortly before the out 
break of the American civil war, imposed on the territory of Now Mexico, it is sai< 
that the labourer, in as much as the capitalist has bought his labour-power, "is hi 
(the capitalist's) money.' 1 The same vie>v was current among the Roman patricUM 
The money they had advanced to the plebeian debtor had been transformed < 
means of subsistence into the flesh and blood of the debtor. This " flesh and blood 
were, therefore, "their money." Hence, the Shylock-law of the Ten Tablt 
Linguet's hypothesis that the patrician creditors from time to time prepared, beyoi 
the Tiber, banquets of debtors' flesh, may remain as undecided as that of Daumer < 
the Christian Eucharist. 

* Reports, kc, for 30th April, 1848, p. 28. 



The Working Day. 



/o 



sectors in the coolest manner that they should place them- 
Jves above the letter of the law, and re-introduce the old 
/stem on their own account. 1 They were acting in the interests 
f the i.'l-advised operatives themselves, " in order to be able to 
ay them higher wages." " This was the only possible plan by 
hich to maintain, under the Ten Hours' Act, the industrial 
tipremacy of Great Britain." " Perhaps it may be a little 
itficult to detect irregularities under the relay system ; but 
/hat of that ? Is the great manufacturing interest of this 
ountry to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save 
ome little trouble to Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of 
actories ? " 2 

All these shifts naturally were of no avail. The Factory 
inspectors appealed to the Law Courts. But soon such a cloud 
f dust in the way of petitions from the masters overwhelmed 
he Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, that in a circular of 
lugust 5th, 184-8, he recommends the inspectors not "to lay 
ii formations against mill-owners for a breach of the letter of 
be Act, or for employment of young persons by relays incases 
n which there is no reason to believe that such young persons 
i.ivc hcen actually employed for a longer period than that 
auctioned by law." Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. Stuart 
tllowed the so-called relay system during the 15 hours of the 

ry day throughout Scotland, where it soon flourished again 
I of old. The English Factory Inspectors, on the other hand, 
leclared that the Home Secretary had no power dictatorial iv 

i pend the law, and continued their legal proceedings against 

the pro-slavery rebellion. 

Bat what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the 

"Hits, in this case the country magistrates — Cobbett's u Greac 

1 npaid ' acquitted them? In these tribunals, the masters 

in judgment on themselves. An example. One Eskrigge, 
pinner, of tin- linn of Kershaw, Leese, & Oo., had laid 

re the Factory Inspector of bis district the scheme of a 

I 93 tern intended for his mill. Receiving a refusal, !"• ai 
kepi quiet A few months later, an individual named 
Robinson, al >a cotton pinner, and if noi his Man I 

mmm, 'then, Philanthropist A hwortJ fcoL • rdHornei m t disgusting 

ports, fee., April, L849, p. ».) 

, |>. HO. 



276 Capitalist Production. 

all events related to Eskrigge, appeared before the boroug 
magistrates of Stoekport on a charge of introducing the identi 
cal plan of relays invented by Eskrigge. Four Justices sa 
among them three cotton-spinners, at their head this sani 
inevitable Eskrigge. Eskrigge acquitted Robinson, and no\ 
was of opinion that what was right for Robinson was fair fc 
Eskrigge. Supported by his own legal decision, he introduce 
the system at once into his own factory. 1 Of course, the com 
position of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law 
These judicial farces, exclaims Inspector Howell, " urgentl 
call for a remedy — either that the law should be so altered a 
to be made to conform to these decisions, or that it shoul 
be administered by a less fallible tribunal, whose decision 
would conform to the law. . . . when these cases are brough 
forward. I long for a stipendiary magistrate." 3 

The Crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation c 
the Act of 1848 absurd. But the Saviours of Society woul 
not allow themselves to be turned from their purpose. Leonar 
Horner reports, " Having endeavoured to enforce the Act . 
by ten prosecutions in seven magisterial divisions, and havin 
been supported by the magistrates in one case only. ... I coi 
sidered it useless to prosecute more for this evasion of the la 
That part of the Act of 1884? which was framed for securing un 
formity in the hours of woik, . . . is thus no longer in force 
my district (Lancashire). Neither have the sub-inspectors 
myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect 
mill working by shifts, that the youn^ persons and worm 
are not working more than 10 hours a-day. ... In a return 
the 30th April, ... of mill-owners working by shifts, tl 
number amounts to 114, and has been for some time rapid 
increasing. In general, the time of working the mill is e 
tended to 13 1 hours, from 6 a.m. to 7£ p.m., . . . in soi 
instances it amounts to 15 hours, from oh a.m. to 8\ p.m. 
Already, in December, 1848, Leonard Horner had a list of < 
manufacturers and 29 overlookers who unanimously declar 

1 Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, pp. 21, 22. Cf. like examples ibid. pp. 4, 

2 By I. and II. Will. IV., ch. 24, s. 10, known as Sir John Hobhouse's Factory A 
it was forbidden to any owner of a cotton-spinning or weaving mill, or the father, 
or brother of such owner, to act as Justice of the Peace in any inquiries that c 
c-1 ncd the Factory Act. 

3 I.e. « Reports, fee, for 30th April, 1840, p. .">. 



The Working Day. 277 

iat no system of supervision could, under this relay system, 
event enormous overwork. 1 Now, the same children and 
jung persons were shifted from the spinning-room to the 
eaving-room, now, during 15 hours, from one factory to 
lothcr. 2 How was it possible to control a system which, 
under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans for 
luffling 'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting 
le hours of work and of rest for different individuals through- 
it the day, so that you may never have one complete set of 
ands working together in the same room at the same time." 3 
But altogether independently of actual overwork, this Bo- 
died relay-system was an offspring of capitalistic fantasy 
ich as Fourier, in his humorous sketches of " Courtes Seances," 
never surpassed, except that the " attractionof labour " was 
hanged into the attraction of capital. Look, for example, at 
■ schemes of the masters which the " respectable " press 
raised as models of " what a reasonable degree of care and 
lethod can accomplish." The personnel of the workpeople 
^84 sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which 
oselves constantly changed and rechanged their constituent 
During the 15 hours of the factory day, capital dragged 
a the labourer now for 30 minutes, now for an hour, and then 
•iislit <1 him out a^ain, to dra^ him into the factory and to 
brast him out afresh, hounding him hither and thither, in 
cattered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of him until 
be full 10 hours 1 work was done. As on tie- stage, the same 
ins had to appear in turns in the different scenes of the 
ffereni acts* But as an actor during the whole coarse of 
play belongs to the stage, so the operatives, during 15 

lours, belonged to the factory, without reckoning the time 

going and coming. Thus the hours of rest were turned 

nto hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to 
he pot-house, and the girls to the brothel At every new 
rick that the capitalist, from day to day, hit upon for keep- 
Dg his machinery going 12 or 1.") hours without increasing 
the number of his hand-, the worker had t<» swallow his meals 
dow in this fragment of time, now in that. At the time of the 

1 Btporta, *<•., for :;ut October, LS49, p. «'>. 
a Boporta, to., fa 80U) April, LS49, p .'i. 
• Boporti, fce.j fa Lit 1 



278 Capitalist Production. 

10 hours 1 agitation, the masters cried out that the working mol 

petitioned in the hope of obtaining 12 hours' wages for 1< 
hours' work. Now they reversed the medal. They paid 1< 
hours' wages for 12 or ] f> hours' lordship over labour-power. 
This was the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretatior 
of the 10 hours' law ! These were the same unctuous free 
traders, perspiring with the love of humanity, who for full If 
years, during the Anti-Corn Law agitation, had preached t» 
the operatives, by a reckoning of pounds, shillings, and pence 
that with free importation of corn, and with the means pos 
sessed by English industry, 10 hours' labour would be quit* 
enough to enrich the capitalists. This revolt of capital, aftei 
two years, was at last crowned with victory by a decision o 
one of the four highest Courts of Justice in England, tlx 
Court of Exchequer, which in a case brought before it oi 
February 8th, 1850, decided that the manufacturers wen 
certainly acting against the sense of the Act of 1844, but tha 
this Act itself contained certain words that rendered it mean 
ingless. " By this decision, the Ten Hours' Act was abolished." 
A crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid of usinj 
the relay-system for young persons and women, now took it 
heart and soul. 4 

But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, follower 
at once a revulsion. The workpeople had hitherto offered 
passive, although inflexible and unremitting resistance. Tht 
now protested in Lancashire and Yorkshire in threatenin 
meetings. The pretended Ten Hours' Act, was thus simp 
humbug, parliamentary cheating, had never existed! Tli 
Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that tli 
antagonism of classes had arrived at an incredible tensu 
Some of the masters themselves murmured : " On account 

1 See Reports, &c, for 30th April, 1849, p. 6, and the detailed explanation of t 
" shifting system," by Factory Inspectors Howell and Saunders, in "Reports, &c, 
31st October, 1848.'' See also the petition to the Queen from the clergy of Ashl 
and vicinity, in the spring of 1849, against the "shift system." 

* Cf. foi example, "The Factory Question and the Ten Hours' Bill." By R. 
Greg, 1837. 

3 F. Kngels : "The English Ten Hours' Bill." (In the " Neue Rheinische Zeitui 
I'olitisch-cekonomische Revue." Edited by K. Marx. April number, 1850, p. 1 
The same " high ' Court of Justice discovered, during the American Civil War 
verbal ambiguity which exactly ieveised the meaning of the law against the armi 
of pirate ship?. 

« Rep., &6., tor 30th April, I860. 



The Working Day. 279 

he contradictory decisions of the magistrates, a condition of 
hings altogether abnormal and anarchical obtains. One law 
olds in Yorkshire, another in Lancashire; one law in one parish 
f Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood. The 
manufacturer in large towns could evade the law, the manu- 
acturer in country districts could not find the people necessary 
or the relay-system, still less for the shifting of hands from 
>ne factory to another," &c. And the first birthright of capital 
a equal exploitation of labour-power by all capitalists. 

Under these circumstances a compromise between masters 
md men was effected that received the seal of Parliament in 
he additional Factory Act of August 5th, 1850. The working 
lay for " young persons and women," was raised from 10 to 
10 J hours for the first five days of the week, and was shortened 
bo 7J on the Saturday. The work was to go on between a.m. 
and 6 p.m., 1 with pauses of not less than 1 \ hours for meal- 
times, these meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time 
for all, and conformably to the conditions of 1844. By this an 
end was put to the relay-system once for all. 2 For children's 
labour, the Act of 1844 remained in force. 

One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself 
special seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat. 
These were the silk manufacturers. In 1833 they had howled 
out in threatening fashion, " if the liberty of working children 
of any age for 10 hours a day were taken away, it would stop 
their works."' It would be impossible for them to buy a surti- 
cient number of children over 13. They extorted the privilege 
they desired The pretext was shown on subsequent investiga- 
tion to be a deliberate lie. 4 It did not, however, prevent them, 
•luring 10 years, from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the 
blood of little children who had to bo placed upon stools for 
the performance of their work.' The Act of 1844 certainly 
" robbed " them of the " liberty " of employing children under 
1 1 longer than t\\ hours a day. Bui it Becured t<> them, >n the 
other hand, tip- privilege <>i working children between 11 and 

1 In irinter, from 7 a. in. to 7 p.m. may !>.■ Hiihstitut.-il. 

" Tin- j.i. s.-nt law (<>f I860) vs. is ;i oompromlM whereby the employed rorrend i I 
tin- \» 11. lit of tin- Ton Hours' Act for Mm ndrantafi "i" mm uniform period for Mm 
commencement and termination of the Inborn oi Mmm whoet Inborn le metric! 
' > 80th April, I860, i>. 1 ».) 
., foi Sept., hii, p. IS. » 1. c. 'I 



28o 



Capitalist Production. 



13, 10 hours a day, and of annulling in their case the education 
made compulsory for all other factory children. This time * 
pretext was "the delicate texture of the fabric in which they 
were employed, requiring a lightness of touch, only to be 
acquired by their early introduction to these factories." 1 T 
children were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their 
delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the 
sake of their hide and tallow. At length, in 1850, the privilege 
granted in 1844 was limited to the departments of silk-twisting 
and silk-winding. But here, to make amends to capital bereft 
of its "freedom," the work time for children from 11 to 13 was 
raised from 10 to 10J hours. Pretext : " Labour in silk mills 
was lighter than in mills for other fabrics, and less likely in 
other respects also to be prejudicial to health." 2 Official 
medical inquiries proved afterwards that, on the contrary, " the 
average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts, and 
amongst the female part of the population is higher even than 
it is in the cotton districts of Lancashire." 3 Despite the pro- 



*L c. 

2 Reports, &c, for 31st Oct., 1861, p. 26. 

3 1. c, p. 27. On the whole the working population, subject to the Factory Act, 
has greatly improved physically. All medical testimony agrees on this point, and 
personal observation at different times has convinced me of it. Nevertheless, and 
exclusive of the terrible death-rate of children in the first years of their life, the 
official reports of Dr. Greenhow show the unfavourable health condition of the manu- 
facturing districts as compared with "agricultural districts of normal health." A> 
evidence, take the following table from his 1S61 report : — 



Percentage 
of Adult 

Males en- 
gaged in 
manufac- 
tures. 


Death-rate 

from 

Pulmonary 

Affections 

per 100,000 

Males. 


Name of District. 


Death-rate 

from 

Pulmonary 

Affections 

per 100,000 

Females. 


Percentage 
of Adult 

Females en- 
gaged in 
manufac- 
tures. 


Kind of Female 
Occupation. 


14-9 


598 


Wigan 


644 


ISO 


Cotton 


426 


708 


Blackburn 


734 


34-9 


Do. 


37 3 


547 


Halifax 


564 


20-4 


Worsted 


419 


611 


Bradford 


603 


30 


Do. 


31-0 


691 


Macclesfield 


804 


26'0 


Silk 


14-9 


588 


Leek 


705 


17-2 


Do. 


36-6 


721 


Stoke-upon-Trent 


665 


19 3 


Earthenware 


30'4 


726 


Woolstanton 
Eight healthy agri- 


727 


13 9 


Do. 




305 


cultural districts 


340 







The Working Day. 281 

ests of the Factory Inspector, renewed every G months, the 
aischief continues to this hour. 1 

The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a.m. to 
..30 p.m., into the 12 hours from G a.m. to 6 p.m. for "young 
>ersons and women " only. It did not, therefore, affect children 
vho could always be employed for half an hour before and 2J 
iours after this period, provided the whole of their labour did 
lot exceed G| hours. Whilst the bill was under discussion, the 
'actory Inspectors laid before Parliament statistics of the in- 
amous abuses due to this anomaly. To no purpose. In the 
ackground lurked the intention of screwing up, during pros- 
>erous years, the working day of adult males to 15 hours by 
he aid of the children. The experience of the three following 

re showed that such an attempt must come to grief against the 

tance of the adult male operatives. The Act of 1850 was 

herefore finally completed in 1853 by forbidding the " employ- 

ip-nt of children in the morning before and in the evening after 

v'oung persons and women." Henceforth with a few exceptions 

lie Factory Act of 1850 regulated the working day of all 

workers in the branches of industry that come under it.' 2 Since 

the passing of the first Factory Act half a century had elapsed. * 

Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original 

phere in the " Printworks' Act of 1845." The displeasure with 

which capital received this new "extravagance " speaks through 

- y line of the Act. It limits the working day for children 

1 It iH well-known with what reluctance the English "free traders " gave up the 
tive duty on the silk manufacture. Instead of the protection against French 
mportation, the absence of protection to English factory children n«>w serves their 
' ini. 

Dnrfa .' 1 59 and 1800, the zenith years of the English cotton industry, some mnnu- 
iMlUieil tried, hy the decoy bait jf higher wages for overtime, to reconcile the adult 
I to an extension of the working day. The hand-mule spinners .ind 

u«aetor minders put an end to the experiment bj a petition to their employer! In 

Men they lay, " Plainly ■peaking, our lives are to us a burthen ; and, win!.- ire trc 

iwnnn ed to the mills nearly two in y% a week more than tin; other operatives >t" the 

"'■v. we feel like helot! m the land, and that we are perpetuating a system 

Ivee ind future generation! This, therefore, is to 

that when we commence work again after the 

• bristmai ind New Years holidays, ire shall irork 'i 11 bonn per week, and no more, 
m nix to nix, with one bom and ;i half out.' (Bop . (Of MHfa April, 

p M) | 
the meam that the wording of this Act afforded for its violation et the Parfcsv 
iy i:. gnlatfooi Act" (0th August, ad la it i 

iloraers u Suggestions foi amending the Faetorj Aeti ko enable the I 
•forking, now beoouM vary prevail t. 



282 Capitalist Production. 

from 8 to 13, and for women to 16 hours, between 6 a.m. an*] 
10 p.m., without any legal pause for meal times. It allows 
males over 13 to be worked at will day and night. 1 It is a 
Parliamentary abortion. 2 

However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in 
those great branches of industry which form the most character- 
istic creation of the modern mode of production. Their 
wonderful development from 1853 to 1860, hand-in-hand with 
the physical and moral regeneration of the factory workers, 
struck the most purblind. The masters from whom the legal 
limitation and regulation had been wrung step by step after a 
civil war of half a century, themselves referred ostentatiously 
to the contrast with the branches of exploitation still " free.'' ; 
The Pharisees of " political economy " now proclaimed the dis- 
cernment of the necessity of a legally fixed working day as a 
characteristic new discovery of their " science." 4 It will bo 
easily understood that after the factory magnates had resigned 
themselves and become reconciled to the inevitable, the power of 
resistance of capital gradually weakened, whilst at the samt 
time the power of attack of the working class grew with th 
number of its allies in the classes of society not immediate 
interested in the question. Hence the comparatively rapic 
advance since 1860. 

The dye-works and bleach-works all came under the Factoi 
Act of 1850 in 1860 ; 5 lace and stocking manufactures in 186' 

1 " Children of the age of 8 years and upwards, have, indeed, been employed frc 
6 a.m. to 9 p.m. during the last half year in my district." (Reports, &c, for 31: 
October, 1857, p. 39.) 

2 "The Printworks' Act is admitted to be a failure, both with reference to its educ 
tional and protective provisions." (Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1862, p. 52.) 

3 Thus, e.g., E. Potter in a letter to the "Times " of March 24th, 18G3. 
"Times " reminded him of the manufacturers' revolt against the Ten Hours' Bill. 

4 Thus, among others, Mr. W. Newmarch, collaborator and editor of Tooke's " Histo 
of Prices." Is it a scientific advance to make cowardly concessions to public opinio 

5 The Act passed in 1800, determined that, in regard to dye and bleach-works, tl 
working day should be fixed on August 1st, 1861, provisionally at 12 hours, and den 
itely on August 1st, 1862, at 10 hours, i.e., at 10£ hours for ordinary days, and 7\ 
Saturday. Now, when the fatal year, 1862, came, the old farce was repeated. E 
sides, the manufacturers petitioned Parliament to allow the employment of you 
persons and women for 12 hours during one year longer. " In the existing conditil 
of the trade (the time of the cotton famine), it was greatly to the advantage of t] 
operative! to work 12 hours per day, and make wages when they could." A bill 
this effect had been brought in, " and it was mainly due to the action of the operate 
bleachers in Scotland that the bill was abandoned." (Reports, &c, for 31st OctOM 



The Working Day. 283 

In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the 
employment of children (1SG3), the same fate was shared by 
the manufacturers of all earthenwares (not merely pottery), 
lucifer-matches, percussion-caps, cartridges, carpets, fustian- 
cutting, and many processes included under the name of 
"finishing." In the year 1803 bleaching in the open air x and 

1862, p. 14-15.) Thus defeated by the very work-people, in whose name it pretended 
to speak, Capital discovered, with the help of lawyer spectacles, that the Act of 1860, 
drawn up, like all the Acts of Parliament for the "protection of labour," in equivocal 
phrases, gave them a pretext to exclude from its working the calenderers and fin- 
ishers. English jurisprudence, ever the faithful servant of capital, sanctioned in the 
Court of Common Pleas this piece of pettifogging. "The operatives have been 
greatly disappointed . . . they have complained of overwork, and it is greatly to be 
regretted that the clear intention of the legislature should have failed by reason of a 
faulty definition." (1. c, p. 18.) 

1 The " open-air bleachers " had evaded the law of 1860, by means of the lie that no 
women worked at it in the night. The lie was exposed by the Factory Inspectors, 
and at the same time Parliament was, by petitions from the operatives, bereft of 
its notions as to the cool meadow-fragrance, in which bleaching in the open-air was 
reported to take place. In this aerial bleaching, drying rooms were used at tempera- 
tures of from 1X)° to 100° Fahrenheit, in which the work was done for the most part by 
girls. '* Cooling" is the technical expression for their occasional escape from the dry- 
ing-rooms into the fresh air. "Fifteen girls in stoves. Heat from 80° to 00° for 
linens, and 100° and upwards for cambrics. Twelve girls ironing and doing-up 
'n a small room about 10 feet square, in the centre of which is a close stove. Tip 
girls itand round the stove, which throws out a terrific heat, and dries the cambrics 
rapidly for the ironers. The hours of work for these hands are unlimited. If busy, 
tiny work till !) or 12 at night for successive nights." (Reports, &c.,for 31st October, 
[>. 56.) A medical man states: "No special hours are allowed for cooling, but 
if the temperature gets too high, or the workers' hands get soiled from perspiration, 

they are allowed to go out for a few minutes My experience, which is 

SOUSiderable, in treating the disease! of stove workers, compels me to express, the 
opinion that their Banitary condition is by no means so high as that of tin- op< ratives 
in a ipinning factory (and Capital, in its memorials to Parliament, bail painted them 
as floridly healthy, after the manner of Kubens). The diseases most observable 
IBIongst th< m are phthisis, bronchitis, irregularity of uterine functions, hysteria in 
its m< (rated forms, and rheumatism. All of these, I believe, are eithei 

directly or indirectly induced by the inquire, overheated air of the apaitmcnts in 

which the bands are employed, and the want of sufficient comfortable clothing to 

I them from the (..hi, damp atmosphere, in winter, when going Ui th'ii 

homes." (i.e. p. r><; r>7.) The Factory Inspectors nin.tr! ed »n the supplementary Ian 
of I860, torn from these open-air bleachers : "The Ad hit not only failed to afford 
th.it protection to the iroi ken which it apponri to offer, but contains a clause .... ap 
o worded that, anless ]<■ i >ous are detected working aft. r 8 o'clock at i 

they appeal to come und( i DO profc < t i \e prOYisionS at all, and if they do so work, tOS 

Bsodi of pioof \h ho doubtful that a oonriotion oaa soaroel] follow." <l a>, p. 58.) 
1 i and pur] ■, therefore, as an Act for any benerolent or eduoationa] 

purpose, it is a failure ■ linos it e.m MUffOtlj I"- called bonOTolenl to permit, win 
tantamount tOOOmpelling, women and children to work II hoUTt a day with or w it limit 

meali, as the ease may be, and perhaps foi longer hours than t ; boufl limit sj 

.without nt K, and without i< -ud to the so, i.il habitl of the 

fsmilies of the neighbourhood, in which Hindi worl bingand dyeing) are 

(Reports, kc, to, 90th April, L86S, p 



284 Capitalist Production. 

baking were placed under special Acts, by which, in the 
former, the labour of young persons and women during the 
night-time (from 8 in the evening to 6 in the morning), and in 
the latter, the employment of journeymen bakers under 18, 
between 9 in the evening and 5 in the morning were forbidden. 
We shall return to the later proposals of the same Commission, 
which threatened to deprive of their " freedom " all the impor- 
tant branches of English Industry, with the exception of agri- 
culture, mines, and the means of transport. 1 

bECTION 7. — THE STRUGGLE FOK THE NORMAL WORKING- LAY. RE- ACTION 
OF THE ENGLISH FACTORY ACTS ON OTHEE COUNTRIES. 

The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus- 
value, or the extraction of surplus-labour, is the specific end 
and aim, the sum and substance, of capitalist production, 
quite apart from any changes in the mode of production, which 
may arise from the subordination of labour to capital. He will 
remember that as far as we have at present gone, only the inde- 
pendent labourer, and therefore only the labourer legally quali- 
fied to act for himself, enters as a vendor of a commodity into a 
contract with the capitalist. If, therefore, in our historical 
sketch, on the one hand, modern industry; on the other, the 
labour of those who are physically and legally minors, play 
important parts, the former was to us only a special depart- 
ment, and the latter only a specially striking example of labour 
exploitation. Without, however, anticipating the subsequent 
development of our inquiry, from the mere connexion of the 
historic facts before us, it follows : 

First. The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless 
extension of the working day, is first gratified in the industries 
earliest revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, 
in those first creations of the modern mode of production, 
cotton, wool, flax, and silk spinning, and weaving. The changes 
in the material mode of production, and the corresponding 
changes in the social relations of the producers 2 gave rise first 

1 Note to the 2nd Ed. Since 18G6, when I wrote the above passages, a re-action 
lias again set in. 

2 "The conduct of each of these classes (capitalists and workmen) has been the 
result of the relative situation in which they have been placed." (Reports, &c, for 
31st October, 1848, p. 113.) 



The Working Day. 285 

U j an extravagance beyond all bounds, and then in opposition 
to this, called forth a control on the part of Society which 
legally limits, regulates, and makes uniform the working day 
and its pauses. This control appears, therefore, during the 
first half of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional 
legislation. 1 As soon as this primitive dominion of the new 
mode of production was conquered, it was found that, in the 
meantime, not only had many other branches of production 
been made to adopt the same factory system, but that manu- 
factures with more or less obsolete methods, such as lotteries, 
glass-making, 4:c, that old-fashioned handicrafts, like baking, 
and, dually, even that the so-called domestic industries, such 
as nail-making, 2 had long since fallen as completely under 
capitalist exploitation as the factories themselves. Legisla- 
tion was, therefore, compelled to gradually get rid of its ex- 
ceptional character, or where, as in England, it proceeds after 
the manner of the Roman Casuists, to declare any house in 
which work was done to be a factory. 3 

Second. The history of the regulation of the working day in 
certain branches of production, and the struggle still going on 
in others in regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that 
the isolated labourer, the labourer as "free" vendor of his 
labour-power, when capitalist production has once attained a 
certain stage, succumbs without any power of resistance. The 
creation of a normal working day is, therefore, the product of 
a protracted civil war, more or less dissembled, between the 
capitalist class and the working class. As the contest takes 
place in (he arena of modern industry, it first breaks out in 
the home of that industry — England. 1 The English factory 

1 * The employment*, placed under restriction, were connected with themanufac 
4 textile fabric! by tin? aid of steam or water-power. There were t wo OOnditioni 
ioh an employment must be subject to cause it to be Inspect* d, ris., the nw 
•team or water-power, and the manufacture of certain specified nines. " (Beports, 
1 .'{1st October, L804, p. 8.) 

■ On the oondition of to-called domes tie Industries, specially valuable materials 
i be found in the latest reports of the ( Ibildren's Employment < kmunission. 

1 "The Acts of Is a (1864) .... embrace a diversity of oeoupatj 

sai sui koms in whiofa differ greatly, end the use of mechanioal power to ghro motion 

kohinery is no longer one of the elements necessary, as I'm nn-i ly, t<> onstu 

. • ' Factory." 1 (Reports, fcc, for 81st I > bob r, 1864, p, 8.) 
1 i". Igium, the paradise of Continental Liberalism, shows no trace of this m 
ttent, Kren in the ooal and metal mi^f, labourers of both sexes, and all ages, 
oonsumed In perfect "freedom," %i in] period, and through any length of time. 
mploy< '1 tb< i i 1 1 giiU 



286 Capitalist Production. 

workers were the champions, not only of the English, but of 
the modern working-class generally, as their theorists were 
the first to throw down the gauntlet to the theory of capital. 1 
Hence, the philosopher of the Factory, Ure, denounces as an 
ineffable disgrace to the English working-class that they in- 
scribed "the slavery of the Factory Acts " on the banner which 
they bore against capital, manfully striving for "perfect free- 
dom of labour." 2 

France limps slowly behind England. The February revolu- 
tion was necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours' law,' 
which is much more deficient than its English original. For 
all that, the French revolutionary method has its special 
advantages. It once for all commands the same limit to the 
working-day in all shops and factories without distinction, 
whilst English legislation reluctantly yields to the pressure of 
circumstances, now on this point, now on that, and is getting 
lost in a hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory enact- 
ments. 4 On the other hand, the French law proclaims as a 

under 16 ; in the blast-furnaces, &c, of every 1000, 688 are men, 149 women, 98 boys, 
and 85 girls under 16. Add to this the low wages for the enormous exploitation of 
mature and immature labour-power. The average daily pay for a man is 2s. 3d., for 
a woman, Is. 8d., for a boy, Is. 2^d. As a result, Belgium had in 1863, as compared 
with 1850, nearly doubled both the amount and the value of its exports of coal, 
iron, &c. 

1 Robert Owen, soon after 1810, not only maintained the necessity of a limitation 
of the workiug day in theory, but actually introduced the 10 hours' day into his 
factory at New Lanark. This was laughed at as a communistic Utopia ; so were bis 
'" Combination of children's education with productive labour," and the Co-operative 
Societies of working-men, first called into being by him. To-day, the first Utopia is 
a Factory Act, the second figures as an official phrase in all Factory Acts, the third 
is already being used as a cloak for reactionary humbug. 

- Ure : "French translation, Philosophic des Manufactures." Paris, 1836, Vol. II., 
p. 39, 40, 67, 77, &c. 

3 In the Compte Rendu of the International Statistical Congress at Paris, 1855. it 
is stated : "The French law, which limits the length of daily labour in factories ami 
workshops to 12 hours, does not confine this work to definite fixed hours. For 
children's labour only the work-time is prescribed as between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. 
Therefore, some of the masters use the right which this fatal silence gives tin in t<> 
keep their works going, without intermission, day in, day out, possibly with the 
exception of Sunday. For this purpose they use two different sets of workers, of 
whom neither is in the workshop more than 12 hours at a time, but the work of the 
establishment lasts day and night. The law is satisfied, but is humanity ? " Beside! 
" the destructive influence of night labour on the human organism," stress is also 
laid upon "the fatal influence of the association of the two sexes by night in the 
same badly-lighted workshops." 

4 " For instance, there is within my district one occupier who, within che same curti 
lage, is at the same time a bleacher and dyer under the Bleaching and Dyeing Worki 
Act, a printer under the Print Works Act, ami a finisher under the Factory Act.' 



The Working Day, 287 

jrinciple that which in England was only won in the name 
if children, minors, and women, and has been only recentl}' 
or the first time claimed as a general right. 1 

In the United States of North America, every independent 
novement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery dis- 
igured a part of the Republic. Labour cannot emancipate 
tself in the white skin where in the black it is branded. 
3ut out of the death of slavery a new life at once arose. The 
irst fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours' agitation, that 
an with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from the 
Ulantic to the Pacific, from New England to California. The 
General Congress of Labour at Baltimore (August lGth, 1866) 
leclared : " The first and great necessity of the present, to free 
he labour of this country from capitalistic slavery, is the pass- 
ng of a law by which eight hours shall be the normal work- 
ng-day in all States of the American Union. We are resolved 
put forth all our strength until this glorious result is 
ittained." 2 At the same time, the Congress of the International 
Working Men's Association at Geneva, on the proposition of 
he London General Council, resolved that "the limitation of 
the working-day is a preliminary condition without which 
ill further attempts at improvement and emancipation must 
love abortive. . . . the Congress proposes eight hours as 
legal limit of the working-day." 

Thus tin; movement of the working-class on both sides of 
he Atlantic, that had grown instinctively out of the conditions 

t of Mi. Baker, in Reports, &c, for October 31st, 1861, i>. 20.) After enunu- 

• the different provisions of these Acts, and the complication! arising from them, 

Mr. Bakei lays: " It will hence appear that it must be rery ditlicult to secure the 

'ion of these three Acta of Parliament where the occupier chooses to evade the 

•iw." But what is assured to the lawyeri by this is lawiuits. 

Tims tip Factory Inspector! at last renture t<> say: "These objections (of 
■! to the 1' l'.iI limitation of the working-day) muit ■uooumb before the broad 
Iple of the rights of labour. . . . There is a time whoa the master's right in 
labour ceases, and his time heenmes his own. even if there were no 
n iii the qut ition." (Reports, kc, for Slat Oct., 1802; p. 64.) 
" Wt, the worker! of Dunkirk, declare that the length of time of labour n quired 
m is too great, and that, far from Leaving the worki r tim< 
'"' education, it plungee him Into ■ condition of eerritude i>ut little betto I 

why we decide that 8 boon an enough for i working-day, and 
ed ai enoti h : why we call to our h.lp tint powerful 

I ; . . . and why we shall consider all IOC 

■ form of laboui end ol th< mi." \\l> olul 

Dunklrl ! i rk Btati 



288 Capitalist Production. 

of production themselves, endorsed the words of the English 
Factory Inspector, R. J. Saunders : " Further steps towards a 
reformation of society can never be carried out with any hope 
of success, unless the hours of labour be limited, and the pre- 
scribed limit strictly enforced." l 

It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the 
process of production other than he entered. In the market 
he stood as owner of the commodity " labour-power ' facu 
to face with other owners of commodities, dealer against 
dealer. The contract by which he sold to the capitalist his 
labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white that he dis- 
posed of himself freely. The bargain concluded, it is dis- 
covered that he was no " free agent," that the time for which 
he is free to sell his labour-power is the time for which he u 
forced to sell it, 2 that in fact the vampire will not lose its hold 
on him " so long as there is a muscle, a nerve, a drop of blood 
to be exploited." 8 For " protection " against " the serpent ol 
their agonies," the labourers must put their heads together 
and, as a class, compel the passing of a law, an all-powerfi 
social barrier that shall prevent the very workers from selling 
by voluntary contract with capital, themselves and thei 
families into slavery and death. 4 In place of the pompoi 
catalogue of the " inalienable rights of man " comes the mode: 
Magna Charta of a legally limited working-day, which shal 
make clear " when the time which the worker sells is ende< 
and when his own begins." 5 Quantum mutatus ab illo ! 

1 Reports, &c., for Oct., 1848, p. 112. 

2 "The proceedings (the manoeuvres of capital, e.g., from 1848-50) have afford* 
moreover, incontrovertible proof of the fallacy of the assertion so often advanced, th 
operatives need no protection, but may be considered as free agents in the disposal 
the only property which they possess — the labour of their hands and the sweat of th 
brows." (Reports, &c, for April 30th, 1850, p. 45.) "Free labour (if so it may 
termed) even in a free country, requires the strong arm of the law to protect it 
(Reports, &c, for October 31st, 1864, p. 34.) "To permit, which is tantamount 
compelling . . to work 14 hours a day with or without meals," &c. (Repts,, &< 
for April 30th, 1863, p, 40.) 3 Friedrich Engcls, 1. c, p. 5. 

4 The 10 Hours' -Act has, in the branches of industry that come under it, " put 
end to the premature decrepitude of the former long-hour workers." (Reports., k 
for 31st Oct., 1859, p. 47.) " Capital (in factories) can never be employed in kef 
ing the machinery in motion beyond a limited time, without certain injury to t 
health and morals of the labourers employed ; and they are not in a position 
protect themselves." (I.e., p. 8.) 

5 " A still greater boon is the distinction at last made clear between the workt 
own time and his master's. The worker knows now when that which he sclb 



Rate and Mass of Surplus- Vahte. 289 

CHAPTER XI. 

RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE. 

n' this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and 
lerefore the part of the working-day necessary for the repro- 
uction or maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to 
e given, constant magnitudes. 

This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time 
iven of the surplus-value that the individual labourer furnishes 
> the capitalist in a definite period of time. If, e.g., the 
ecessary labour amounts to 6 hours daily, expressed in a 
uantum of gold = 3 shillings, then 3s. is the daily value of 
ae labour-power or the value of the capital advanced in the 
living of one labour-power. If, further, the rate of surplus- 
alue be = 100 %, this variable capital of 3s. produces a mass 
f surplus- value of 3s., or the labourer supplies daily a mass of 
orplus-labour equal to hours. 

But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in 
toney of the total value of all the labour-powers that he 
mploys simultaneously. Its value is, therefore, equal to the 
rerage value of one labour-power, multiplied by the number 
l labour-powers employed. With a given value of labour- 
>wer, therefore, the magnitude of the variable capital varies 
irectly as the number of labourers employed simultaneously. 
f the daily value of one labour-power = 3s., then a capital of 
100s. must be advanced in order to exploit daily 100 labour- 

>wers, of n times 3s., in order to exploit daily n labour- 

'!•'!, jwhI when hit own begim ; and by po a tore foreknowledge of tliis, fa 

oabled to pre-arrange J i i -> own minntee for his own purposes* w (1. c, p, 68*) " By 

thi in in. i '. i of tin ii own time (tl ' [yen fchi tn i mora] 

Nrhich is directing them to the eventual po • ;• -n <>f politioal power" (1, o,, 

17). With tuppressed irony, and In rery well weighed words, the Pkotory In- 

liint that the actual law also frees the capitalist from some of the brutality 

man who is a mere embodiment of oapital, tad thai it I a him 

r a little "culture." "Formerly tha master had no time for anything but 

eant had no time foi anything l»ut labou ' (t «■., i>. I . 

T 



290 Capitalist Production. 

In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daili 
value of one Labour-power, produce a daily surplus-value of St 
a variable capital of 300s. will produce a daily surplus-value o 
300s., and one of n times 3s. a daily surplus-value of n x % 
The mass of the surplus-value produced is therefore equal fa 
the surplus-value which the working-day of one laboure 
supplies multiplied by the number of labourers employed 
But as further the mass of surplus- value which a single laboure 
produces, the value of labour-power being given, is determine! 
by the rate of the surplus-value, this law follows : the mi 
the surplus-value produced is equal to the amount of thi 
variable capital advanced, multiplied by the rate of surplus 
value ; in other words : it is determined by the compound rati* 
between the number of labour-powers exploited simultaneously 
by the same capitalist and the degree of exploitation of eacl 
individual labour-power. 

Let the mass of the surplus-value be S, the surplus-valui 
supplied by the individual labourer in the average day s, th 
variable capital daily advanced in the purchase of one individua 
labour-power v, the sum total of the variable capital V, t 
value of an average labour-power P, its degree of exploitath 
a' /jurpius.i L ib,.ur \ j ^j e num b er f labourers employed n : 

a Vnecessary-labuur J L J > 

have : 

S = 

' Px J' x n 

It is always supposed, not only that the value of an avi 
labour-power is constant, but that the labourers employed 
a capitalist are reduced to average labourers. There are 
ceptional cases in which the surplus-value produced does n 
increase in proportion to the number of labourers exploit* 
but then the value of the labour-power does not remain OC 
stent. 

In the production of a definite mass of surplus-value, thei 
fore, the decrease of one factor may be compensated by the 
ci ease of the other. If the variable capital diminishes, and 
the same time the rate of surplus-value increases in the sal 



Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value. 291 

itio, the mass of surplus-value produced remains unaltered. 
: on our earlier assumption the capitalist must advance 300s., 
1 order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if the rate of 
nrplus- value amounts to 50 %, this variable capital of 300*. 
ields a surplus-value of 150s. or of 100 x 3 working hours. If 
je rate of surplus-value doubles, or the working-day, instea 1 
f being extended from (J to 9, is extended from G to 12 hour.* 
ad at the same time variable capital is lessened by half, and 
iduced to 150s., it yields also a surplus- value of 150s. or 50 x 
working hours. Diminution of the variable capital may there- 
robe compensated by a proportionate rise in the degree of 
sploitation of labour-power, or the decrease in the number of 
ie labourers employed by a proportionate extension of the 
orking-day. Within certain limits therefore the supply of 
bbour exploitable by capital is independent of the supply of 
kbourers. 1 On the contrary, a fall in the rate of surplus-value 

unaltered the mass of the surplus-value produced, if the 
mount of the variable capital, or number of the labourers em- 
loyed, increases in the same proportion. 
Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number 
t labourers employed, or of the amount of variable capita! 
dvanced, by a rise in the rate of surplus-value, or by the 
ingthening of the working-day, has impassable limits. Whate- 
ver the value of labour-power may be, whether the working 
iiue necessary for the maintenance of the labourer is 2 <>r 10 
oars, the total value that a labourer can produce, day in, day 
ut, is always less than the value in which 24? hours of labour 
• embodied, less than L2s., if 12s, is the money expression foi 
I- hours of realized labour. In our former assumption, accord 

which <; working hours are daily necessary in order to 
eproduce the labour-power itself or to replace the value of the 
1 1 'Hal advanced in its purchase, a variable capital of 1500s., thai 
tnploys 500 labourers at a rate of surplus-value of LOO with 
1 - hours' working-day, produces daily a surplus-value of 1 500s, 
1 <»! <; > .">()() working hours, A capital of 300a that employs 

lementary law appeam to be unknown to the vulgat toonomiats, who, upside 
ohimedet, in the determination of th< market priooof labotu by §up] 
imagine they have found the fulcrum bj meani <>t which, not to bmn 
orld, but t-i itop it v motion. 



292 Capitalist Production. 

100 labourers a day with a rate of surplus-value of 200 / 
with a working-day of 18 hours, produces only a mass 
surplus-value of GOOs. or 12 x 100 working hours; and it- t«»t 
value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital advaim 
plus the surplus-value, can, day in, day out, never reach the su 
of 1200s. or 24 x 100 working hours. The absolute limit 
the average working-day — -this being by Nature always les 
24 hours — sets an absolute limit to the compensation of a i 
duction of variable capital by a higher rate of surplus-value, 
of the decrease of the number of labourers exploited by a high 
degree of exploitation of labour-power. This palpable law 
of importance for the clearing up of many phenomena, arisu 
from a tendency (to be worked out later on) of capital to r 
duce as much as possible the number of labourers employ 
it, or its variable constituent transformed into labour-power, 
contradiction to its other tendency to produce the greate 
possible mass of surplus-value. On the other hand, if the ma 
of labour-power employed, or the amount of variable capifti 
increases, but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of surpli 
value, the mass of the surplus-value produced, falls. 

A third law results from the determination, of the mas* 
the surplus- value produced, by the two factors : rate of surp 
value and amount of variable capital advanced. The raU 
surplus-value, or the degree of exploitation of labour-po^ 
and the value of labour-power, or the amount of necesa 
working time being given, it is self-evident that the greater 
variable capital, the greater would be the mass of the va 
produced and of the surplus-value. If the limit of the workii 
day is given, and also the limit of its necessary constituent, 
mass of value and surplus-value that an individual capita 
produces, is clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of lab 
that he sets in motion. But this, under the conditions suppi 
above, depends on the mass of labour-power, or the number 
labourers whom he exploits, and this number in its turn 
determined by the amount of the variable capital advam 
With a given rate of surplus-value, and a given value of labo 
power, therefore, the masses of surplus-value produced v 
directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advam 



Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value. 293 

Jow we know that the capitalist divides his capital into two 
•arts. One part he lays out in means of production. This is 
he constant part of his capital. The other part he lays out in 
ving labour-power. This part forms his variable capital. On 
he basis of the same mode of social production, the division of 
apital into constant and variable differs in different branches 
f production, and within the same branch of production, too, 
his relation changes with changes in the technical conditions 
rid In the social combinations of the processes of production. 
Jut in whatever proportion a given capital breaks up into a 
onstant and a variable part, whether the latter is to the former 
s 1 : 2 or 1 : 10 or 1 : x, the law just laid down is not affected 
>y this. For, according to our previous analysis, the value of 
be constant capital reappears in the value of the product, but 
loes not enter into the newly produced value, the newly 
Heated value-product. To employ 1000 spinners, more raw 
rial, spindles, &c, are, of course, required, than to employ 
LO >. The value of these additional means of production how- 
may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small ; it has 
10 influence on the process of creation of surplus-value by 
Deans of the labour-powers that put them in motion. The law 
Lemonstrated above now, therefore, takes this form : the masses 
•f Value and of surplus-value produced by different capitals — 
value <»f labour-power being given and its degree of ex- 
lohation being equal — vary directly as the amounts of the 
able constituents of these capitals, £.&, as their constituents 
formed into living Labour-power. 
This law dearly contradicts all experience based on appear- 
Every one knows tint a cotton spinner, who, reckoning 
Lhe percentage on the whole of his applied capital, employs 
much constant ami little variable capital, does not, on account 
>t this, pocket less profit or surplus-value than a baker, who 
relatively Bets in motion much variable ami little constant 
capital. For the solution of this apparent contradiction, many 
intermediate terms are as \'i wanted, as from tin- standpoint 
"1 elementary algebra many intermediate terms are wanted t" 
understand that may repre ent an actual magnitude Classical 
nomy, although not formulating the law, holds in tin< 



294 Capitalist Production. 

to it, because it is a necessary consequence of the general law 
of value. It tries to rescue the law from collision with 
contradictory phenomena by a violent abstraction. It will be 
seen later 1 how the school of Ricardo has come to grief over 
this stumbling-block. Vulgar economy which, indeed, "has 
really learnt nothing," here as everywhere sticks to appearances 
in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them. 
In opposition to Spinoza, it believes that " ignorance is a suffi- 
cient reason." 

The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a 
society, day in, day out, may be regarded as a single collective 
working-day. If, e.g., the number of labourers is a million, and 
the average working-day of a labourer is 10 hours, the social 
working-day consists often million hours. With a given length 
of this working-day, whether its limits are fixed physically 
or socially, the mass of surplus-value can only be increased by 
increasing the number of labourers, i.e., of the labouring 
population. The growth of population here forms the mathe- 
matical limit to the production of surplus-value by the total 
social capital. On the contrary, with a given amount of 
population, this limit is formed by the possible lengthening of 
the working-day. 2 It will, however, be seen in the following 
chapter that this law only holds for the form of surplus-value 
dealt with up to the present. 

From the treatment of the production of surplus- value, so 
far, it follows that not every sum of money, or of value, is at 
pleasure transformable into capital. To effect this transforma- 
tion, in fact, a certain minimum of money or of exchange- value 
must be presupposed in the hands of the individual possessor 
of money or commodities. The minimum of variable capital is 
the cost price of a single labour-power, employed the whole 
year through, day in, day out, for the production of surplus- 
value. If this labourer were in possession of his own means 

1 Further particulars will be given in Book IV. 

2 " The labour, that is the economic time, of society, is a given portion, say ten 

hours a day of a million of people, or ten million hours Capital has its 

boundary of increase. This boundary may, at any given period, be attained in the 
actual extent of economic time employed." (' An Essay on the Political Economy of 
Nations." London, 1821, pp. 47, 49.) 



Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value. 295 

of production, and were satisfied to live as a labourer, he need 
not work beyond the time necessary for the reproduction of 
his means of subsistence, say 8 hours a day. He would, besides, 
only require the means of production sufficient for 8 working 
hours. The capitalist, on the other hand, who makes him do, 
besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours' surplus-labour, requires an 
additional sum of money for furnishing the additional means 
of production. On our supposition, however, he would have to 
employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplus-value 
appropriated daily, as well as, and no better than a labourer, 
i.e., to be able to satisfy his necessary wants. In this case the 
mere maintenance of life would be the end of his production, 
not the increase of wealth ; but this latter is implied in 
capitalist production. That he may live only twice as well 
as an ordinary labourer, and besides turn half of the surplus- 
value produced into capital, he would have to raise, with the 
number of labourers, the minimum of the capital advanced 8 
times. Of course he can, like his labourer, take to work him- 
self, participate directly in the process of production, but he is 
then only a h} T brid between capitalist and labourer, a " small 
master." A certain stage of capitalist production necessitates 
that the capitalist be able to devote the whole of the time 
during which he functions as a capitalist, i.e., as personified 
capital, to the appropriation and therefore control of the labour 
of others, and to the selling of the products of this labour. 1 
The guilds of the middle ages therefore tried to prevent by 
force the transformation of the master of a trade into a 
capitalist, by limiting the number of labourers that could be 

1 " The farmer cannot rely on his own lahonr, and if he does, I will maintain that 
he is a loser hy it. His employment should he a general attention to the whole : his 
thresher must be watched, or he will soon lose his wages in corn not threshed out ; 
his mowers, reapers, <fcc, must he looked after; he must constantly go round bin 
fences ; he must see there is no neglect ; which would ho the caso if he was confine-! 
to any one spot." (" An Inquiry into the connection between the Price of Provision! 
and the Size of Farms, &c. By a Farmer." London, 177:?, p. 12.) This book il rery 
interesting. In it the genesis of the "capitalist farmer" or "merchant farmo 
he is explicitly called, may be itudied, and his self -Unification at the expense <>f the 
small farmer who lias only to do with hare lubsistenoe, !"■ noted. "The class of 

capitalists are from tin; first partially, and they beoome ultimately completely, dti 
charged from the neoessity of the manual labour." ("Texl booh of Lectures on ti ( . 

Political Economy of Nations. By the Rev. Richard JonCS.* Hertford, 
Lecture III. p. 89.) 



296 Capitalist Production. 

employed by one master within a very small maximum. The 
possessor of money or commodities actually turns into a 
capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum advanced 
for production greatly exceeds the maximum of the middle 
ages. Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of 
the law discovered by Hegel (in his " Logic "), that merely 
quantitative differences beyond a certain point pass into 
qualitative changes. 1 

The minimum of the sum of value that the individual pos- 
sessor of money or commodities must command, in order to 
metamorphose himself into a capitalist, changes with the 
different stages of development of capitalist production, and 
is at given stages different in different spheres of production, 
according to their special and technical conditions. Certain 
spheres of production demand, even at the very outset of capi- 
talist production, a minimum of capital that is not as yet 
found in the hands of single individuals. This gives rise partly 
to state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of 
Colbert, and as in many German states up to our own epoch : 
partly to the formation of societies with legal monopoly for the 
exploitation of certain branches of industry and commerce, the 
fore-runners of our modern joint-stock companies. 2 

Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital 
acquired the command over labour, i.e., over functioning laboui- 
power or the labourer himself. Personified capital, the capi- 
talist takes care that the labourer does his work regularly and 
with the proper degree of intensity. 

Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which 

1 The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked out by 
Laurent and Gerhardt rests on no other law. (Addition to 3rd Edition.) For the ex- 
planation of this statement, which is not very clear to non-chemists, we remark that 
the author speaks here of the homologous series of carbon compounds, first so named 
by C. Gerhardt in 1843, each series of which has its own general algebraic formula. 
Thus the series of paraffins: C n H 2n+2 , that of the normal alcohols : C u H- u *-0 : 
of the normal fatty acids : C n H 2n O 2 and many others. In the above examples, by 
the simply quantitative addition of C ll 2 to the molecular formula, a qualitatively 
ailierent body is each time formed. On the share (overestimated by Marx) of Laurent 
and Gerhardt in the determination of this important fact see Kopp, " Entwickluug 
der Onemie." Miinchen, 1873, pp. 709, 716, and Schorlemmer, " Rise and Progress 
of Organic Chemistry. " London. 1879, p. 54.— Ed. 

* Martin Luther calls these kinds of institutions : "The Company Monopolia." 



Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value. 297 

compels the working class to do more work than the narrow 
round of its own life- wants prescribes. As a producer of the 
activity of others, as a pumper-out of surplus-labour and ex- 
ploiter of labour-power, it surpasses in energy, disregard of 
bounds, recklessness and efficiency, all earlier systems of pro- 
duction based on directly compulsory labour. 

At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the tech- 
nical conditions in which it historically finds it. It does not, 
therefore, change immediately the mode of production. The 
production of surplus-value — in the form hitherto considered 
by us — by means of simple extension of the working-day, 
proved, therefore, to be independent of any change in the 
mode of production itself. It was not less active in the old- 
fashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories. 

If we consider the process of production from the point of 
view of the simple labour-process, the labourer stands in relation 
to the means of production, not in their quality as capital, but 
as the mere means and material of his own intelligent pro- 
ductive activity. In tanning, e.g., he deals with the skins a. 
his simple object of labour. It is not the capitalist whose skin 
he tans. But it is different as soon as we deal with the pro 
of production from the point of view of the process of creation 
of >iirplus-value. The means of production are at once chao 
into means for the absorption of the labour of other-. It is now 
no longer the labourer that employs the means of production, 
but the means of production that employ the labourer. In- 
stead of being consumed by bim as material elements of bis 
productive activity, they consume him as tie- fermenl n< 
sary to their own Life-process, and the Ufe-process of capital 

consists only in its movement as value constantly expanding, 
constant iv multiplying Itself Furnaces and workshops that 
stand idle by night, and absorb n<> living labour, are 'a mere 
bo the capitalist. Hence, furnaces and workshops con- 
stitute lav fill claims upon the night-labour <>f the workpeople 
The simple transformation of money into the material fad 
of the process of production, into means of production, tn 
forms the latter into a title and ;i righl to tie- labour and 
surplus-labour of others. An example will Bhow, in conclu 



298 Capitalist Prodtcction. 

how this sophistication, peculiar to and characteristic of capitalist 
production, this complete inversion of the relation between dead 
and living labour, between value and the force that creates 
value, mirrors itself in the consciousness of capitalists. During 
the revolt of the English factory lords between 1848 and 1850, 
" the head of one of the oldest and most respectable houses in 
the West of Scotland, Messrs. Carlile Sons & Co., of the linen 
and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now 
existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, 
and four generations of the same family have conducted it " . . . 
this " very intelligent gentleman " then wrote a letter 1 in the 
"Glasgow Daily Mail" of April 25th, 1849, with the title, 
"The relay system," in which among other things the following 
grotesquely naive passage occurs : " Let us now . . . see what 
evils will attend the limiting to 10 hours the working of the 
factory. . . . They amount to the most serious damage to 
the mill-owner's prospects and property. If he (i.e., his "hands") 
worked 12 hours before, and is limited to 10, then every 12 
machines or spindles in his establishment shrink to 10, and 
should the works be disposed of, they will be valued only as 10, 
so that a sixth part would thus be deducted from the value of 
every factory in the country." 2 

To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the 
accumulated capitalistic qualities of " four generations," the 
value of the means of production, spindles, &c. is so inseparably 
mixed up with their property, as capital, to expand their own 
value, and to swallow up daily a definite quantity of the un- 
paid labour of others, that the head of the firm of Carlile & Co. 
actually imagines that if he sells his factory, not only will the 
value of the spindles be paid to him, but, in addition, their 
power of annexing surplus-value, not only the labour which is 
embodied in them, and is necessary to the production of spindles 

1 Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 30th, 1849, p. 59. 

2 1. c, p. 60. Factory Inspector Stuart, himself a Scotchman, and in contrast to 
the English Factory Inspectors, quite taken captive by the capitalistic method of 
thinking, remarks expressly on this letter which he incorporates in his report that it 
is " the most useful of the communications which any of the factory-owners working 
with relays have given to those engaged in the same trade, and which is the most 
calculated to remove the prejudices of such of them as have scruples respecting any 
change of the arrangement of the hours of work." 



Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value. 299 

of this kind, but also the surplus-labour which they help to 
pump out daily from the brave Scots of Paisley, and for that 
very reason he thinks that with the shortening of the working- 
day by 2 hours, the selling-price of 12 spinning machines 
dwindles to that of 10 ! 



PART IV. 
PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE CONCEPT OF EELATIVE SURPLUS- VALUE. 

That portion of the working-day which merely produces 
an equivalent for the value paid by the capitalist for his 
labour-power, has, up to this point, been treated by us as 
a constant magnitude ; and such in fact it is, under given 
conditions of production and at a given stage in the econo- 
mical development of society. Beyond this, his necessary 
labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue to work 
for 2, 3, 4, 6, &c, hours. The rate of surplus-value and 
the length of the working day depended on the magni- 
tude of this prolongation. Though the necessary labour- 
time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the 
total working-day was variable. Now suppose we have a 
working-day whose length, and whose apportionment be- 
tween necessary labour and surplus-labour, are given. Let 

the whole line a c, a b — c represent, for example, 

a working-day of 12 hours ; the portion of a b 10 hours 



The Concept of Relative Surplus- Vatiie. joi 

of necessary labour, and the portion b c 2 hours of surplus- 
labour. How now can the production of surplus-value be 
increased, i.e., how can the surplus-labour be prolonged, with- 
out, or independently of, any prolongation of a c ? 

Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable 
of prolongation, if not by extension beyond its end c, which is 
also the end of the working day a c, yet, at all events, by push- 
ing back its starting point b in the direction of a. Assume 
that b' — b in the line a b' b c is equal to half of b c 

a b' — b c 

or to one hour's labour-time. If now, in a c, the working day 
of 12 hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b' c ; the 
surplus-labour increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, 
although the working day remains as before at 12 hours. 
This extension of the surplus labour-time from b c to b' c, from 
2 hours to 3 hours, is, however, evidently impossible, without a 
simultaneous contraction of the necessary labour-time from 
a b into a b', from 10 hours to 9 hours. The prolongation of 
the surplus-labour would correspond to a shortening of the 
necessary labour ; or a portion of the labour-time previously 
consumed, in reality, for the labourer's own benefit, would be 
converted into labour-time for the benefit of the capitalist 
There would be an alteration, not in the length of the working 
day, but in its division into necessary labour-time and surplus 
labour-time. 

On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the 
surplus-labour is given, when the length of the working day, 
and the value of labour-power, are given. The value "t 
Labour-power, i.e., the labour-time requisite to produce labour- 
power, determines the labour-time necessary for the repro- 
duction of that value. If one working hour be embodied in 
sixpence, and the value of a day's labour-po\wr be five shillii 
the labourer must work 10 hours a day, in order t>» rep 
the value paid by capital for his labour-power, or to produce 
an equivalent for t\\>. value of lii^ daily necessary meai 11b- 

i tence. Given the value of these means of subsistence, the 
value of his labour-power is given; 1 and given the wdue ol bis 

1 The value of hi* awr.i ;•• ■! i.ly N tmiiiiu-tl l»y ItbOOH I I 



302 Capitalist Production. 

labour-power, the duration of his necessary labour-time is given. 
The duration of the surplus-labour, however, is arrived at, by 
subtracting the necessary labour-time from the total working 
day. Ten hours subtracted from twelve, leave two, and it is 
not easy to see, how, under the given conditions, the surplus- 
labour can possibly be prolonged beyond two hours. No 
doubt, the capitalist can, instead of five shillings, pay the 
labourer four shillings and sixpence or even less. For the re- 
production of this value of four shillings and sixpence, nine 
hours labour-time would suffice ; and consequently three hours 
of surplus-labour, instead of two, would accrue to the capitalist, 
and the surplus- value would rise from one shilling to eighteen- 
pence. This result, however, would be obtained only by lowering 
the wages of the labourer below the value of his labour-power. 
With the four shillings and sixpence which he produces in nine 
hours, he commands one-tenth less of the necessaries of life than 
before, and consequently the proper reproduction of his labour- 
power is crippled. The surplus-labour would in this case be 
prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal limits ; its 
domain would be extended only by a usurpation of part of the 
domain of necessary labour-time. Despite the important part 
which this method plays in actual practice, we are excluded 
from considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all 
commodities, including labour-power, are bought and sold at 
their full value. Granted this, it follows that the labour-time 
necessary for the production of labour-power, or for the repro- 
duction of its value, cannot be lessened by a fall in the 
labourer's wages below the value of his labour-power, but only 
by a fall in this value itself. Given the length of the working 
day, the prolongation of the surplus-labour must of necessity 

" so as to live, labour, and generate." (Wm. Petty : " Political Anatomy of Ireland," 
1672, p. 64.) " The price of Labour is always constituted of the price of necessaries 
. . . whenever .... the labouring man's wages will not, suitably to his low rank and 
station, as a labouring man, support such a family as is often the lot of many of them 
to have," he does not receive proper wages. (J. Vanderlint, 1. c. p. 15.) " Le simple 
ouvrier, qui n'a que ses bras et son industrie, n'a rien qu'autant qu'il parvient a 
vendre a d'autres sa peine. . . En tout genre de travail il doit arriver, et il arrive en 
effet, que le salaire de l'ouvrier se borne a ce qui lui est necessaire pour lui procurer 
8a subsistance. " (Turgot, Reflexions, &c, Oeuvres ed. Daire t. I. p. 10). " The price 
of the necessaries of life is, in fact, the cost of producing labour." (Malthus, 
Inquiry into, &c, Rent, London, 1815, p. 48 note). 



The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value. 30 



o 



originate in the curtailment of the necessary labour-time ; the 
latter cannot arise from the former. In the example we have 
taken, it is necessary that the value of labour-power should 
actually fall by one-tenth, in order that the necessary labour- 
time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours to 
nine, and in order that the surplus-labour may consequently 
be prolonged from two hours to three. 

Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, 
that the same necessaries of life which were formerly produced 
in ten hours, can now be produced in nine hours. But this is 
impossible without an increase in the productiveness of labour. 
For example, suppose a shoemaker, with given tools, makes in 
one working day of twelve hours, one pair of boots. If he 
must make two pairs in the same time, the productiveness of 
his labour must be doubled ; and this cannot be done, except 
by an alteration in his tools or in his mode of working, or in 
both. Hence, the conditions of production, i.e., his mode of 
production, and the labour- process itself, must be revolu- 
tionised. By increase in the productiveness of labour, we 
mean, generally, an alteration in the labour-process, of such a 
kind as to shorten the labour-time socially necessary for the 
production of a commodity, and to endow a given quantity of 
labour with the power of producing a greater quantity of use- 
value. 1 Hitherto in treating of surplus- value, arising from a 
simple prolongation of the working day, we have assumed the 
mode of production to be given and invariable. But when 
surplus-value has to be produced by the conversion of necessary 
labour into surplus-labour, it by no means suffices for capital 
to take over the labour-process in the form under which it has 
been historically handed down, and then simply to prolong the 
duration of that process. The technical and social conditions 
of the process, and consequently the very mode of production 
must be revolutionised, before the productiveness of labour can 
be increased. By that means alone can the value of laboui- 

1 "Quando si perfezionano le arti, cho non e altro die la scoperta di nuovo vie-, ondfl 
si poBsa cornpicre una manufattura con meno gentt o (ohe e lo stesso) in minor tempo 
di prima." (Galiani 1. c. p. 159.) " L'cconomie hut les fraia <le production DC peu 
done ctre autre chose (pie l'cuonomic sur la quantitc dc travail empl"V< pOWl 
produiic." (Sismondi Etudes t. I. p. ~'l.) 



304 Capitalist Production. 

power be made to sink, and the portion of the working day 
necessary for the reproduction of that value, be shortened. 

The surplus-value produced by prolongation of the working 
day, I call absolute surplus-value. On the other hand, the 
surplus-value arising from the curtailment of the necessary 
labour-time, and from the corresponding alteration in the re- 
spective lengths of the two components of the working day, I 
call relative surplus-value. 

In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the in- 
crease in the productiveness of labour must seize upon those 
branches of industry, whose products determine the value of 
labour-power, and consequently either belong to the class of 
customary means of subsistence, or are capable of supplying 
the place of those means. But the value of a commodity is de- 
termined, not only by the quantity of labour which the 
labourer directly bestows upon that commodity, but also by the 
labour contained in the means of production. For instance, 
the value of a pair of boots depends, not only on the cobbler's 
labour, but also on the value of the leather, wax, thread, fee. 
Hence, a fall in the value of labour-power is also brought about 
by an increase in the productiveness of labour, and by a corres- 
ponding cheapening of commodities in those industries which 
supply the instruments of labour and the raw material, that 
form the material elements of the constant capital required for 
producing the necessaries of life. But an increase in the pro- 
ductiveness of labour in those branches of industry which 
supply neither the necessaries of life, nor the means of produc- 
tion for such necessaries, leaves the value of labour-power un- 
disturbed. 

The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro 
tanto fall in the value of labour-power, a fall proportional to 
the extent of that commodity's employment in the reproduc- 
tion of labour-power. Shirts, for instance, are a necessary 
means of subsistence, but are only one out of many. The 
totality of the necessaries of life consists, however, of various 
commodities, each the product of a distinct industry ; and the 
value of each of those commodities enters as a component part 
into the value of labour-power. This latter value decreases 



The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value. 305 

with the decrease of the labour-time necessary for its reproduc- 
tion ; the total decrease being the sum of all the different cur- 
tailments of labour-time effected in those various and distinct 
industries. This general result is treated, here, as if it were 
the immediate result directly aimed at in each individual case. 
Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, 
by increasing the productiveness of labour, he by no means 
necessarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and 
shortening, pro tanto, the necessary labour-time. But it is only 
in so far as he ultimately contributes to this result, that he 
assists in raising the general rate of surplus- value. 1 The 
general and necessary tendencies of capital must be distin- 
guished from their forms of manifestation. 

It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which 
the laws, immanent in capitalist production, manifest them- 
selves in the movements of individual masses of capital, where 
they assert themselves as coercive laws of competition, and are 
brought home to the mind and consciousness of the individual 
capitalist as the directing motives of his operations. But this 
much is clear ; a scientific analysis of competition is not 
possible, before we have a conception of the inner nature of 
capital, just as the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies 
are not intelligible to any but him, who is acquainted with 
their real motions, motions which are not directly perceptible 
by the senses. Nevertheless, for the better comprehension of 
the production of relative surplus-value, we may add the 
following remarks, in which we assume nothing more than the 
results we have already obtained. 

If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six 
shillings will be produced in a working day of 12 hours. 
Suppose, that with the prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 
articles are produced in these 12 hours. Let the value of the 
means of production used up in each article be sixpence. Under 
these circumstances, each article costs one shilling: sixpence 
for the value of the means of production, and sixpence for the 

1 " Let us Buppose the products . . . . of the manufactuivr ire doubled by 

improvement in machinery . . . he will he ahle to clothe hil workmen bj meant ©I 
a smaller proportion of the entire return . . . and thus nil profit will bt raited 
liut in no other way will it he lafluenoed." (Kamhay, 1. c. p. 1W, lo'J.) 



306 Capitalist Production. 

value newly added in working with those means. Now let 
some one capitalist contrive to double the productiveness of 
labour, and to produce in the working day of 12 hours, 24 in- 
stead of 12 such articles. The value of the means of produc- 
tion remaining the same, the value of each article will fall to 
ninepence, made up of sixpence for the value of the means of 
production and threepence for the value newly added by the 
labour. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the 
day's labour creates, as before, a new value of six shillings and 
no more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many 
articles. Of this value each article now has embodied in it ^Vth, 
instead of y^th, threepence instead of sixpence ; or, what 
amounts to the same thing, only half an hour's instead of a 
whole hour's labour-time, is now added to the means of pro- 
duction while they are being transformed into each article. 
The individual value of these articles is now below their social 
value ; in other words, they have cost less labour-time than 
the great bulk of the same article produced under the average 
social conditions. Each article costs, on an average, one shilling, 
and represents 2 hours of social labour ; but under the altered 
mode of production it costs only ninepence, or contains only \\ 
hours' labour. The real value of a commodity is, however, not 
its individual value, but its social value ; that is to say, the 
real value is not measured by the labour-time that the article 
in each individual case costs the producer, but by the labour- 
time socially required for its production. If therefore, the 
capitalist who applies the new method, sells his commodity 
at its social value of one shilling, he sells it for threepence 
above its individual value, and thus realises an extra surplus- 
value of threepence. On the other hand, the working day of 
12 hours is, as regards him, now represented by 24 articles 
instead of 12. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of 
one working day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., 
the market must become twice as extensive. Other things 
being equal, his commodities can command a more extended 
market only by a diminution of their prices. He will there- 
fore sell them above their individual but under their social 
value, say at tenpence each. By this means he still squeezes 



The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value. 307 

an extra surplus-value of one penny out of each. This aug- 
mentation of surplus- value is pocketed by him, whether his 
commodities belong or not to the class of necessary means of 
subsistence that participate in determining the general value of 
labour-power. Hence, independently of this latter circumstance, 
there is a motive for each individual capitalist to cheapen 
his commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour. 

Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of 
surplus-value arises from the curtailment of the necessary 
labour-time, and from the corresponding prolongation of the 
surplus-labour. 1 Let the necessary labour-time amount to 
10 hours, the value of a day's labour- power to five shillings, the 
surplus labour-time to 2 hours, and the daily surplus- value to 
one shilling. But the capitalist now produces 24 articles, 
which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty shillings in 
all. Since the value of the means of production is twelve 
shillings, 14r of these articles merely replace the constant 
capital advanced. The labour of the 12 hours' working day is 
represented by the remaining 9 : i articles. Since the price of 
the labour-power is five shillings, 6 articles represent the 
necessary labour-time, and 3 J articles the surplus-labour. The 
ratio of the necessary labour to the surplus-labour, which under 
average social conditions was 5 : 1, is now only 5 : 3. The 
same result may be arrived at in the following way. The 
value of the product of the working day of 1 2 hours is twenty 
shillings. Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to the value of 
the means of production, a value that merely re-appeai 
There remain eight shillings, which are the expression in 

DO' A 

money, of the value newly created (luring the working day, 
This sum is greater than the sum in which average social 
labour of the same kind is expressed : twelve houm of the 
latter labour are expressed by six shillings only. The exc 
tionally productive labour operates as intensified labour ; it 

1 " A mans profit doei not depend upon hlsoommand of the 1 : otto r ,n, ' n H 

labour, bat upon hi* command ol labour itself . If beoan iell bl oodi si 1 

, while hia workmen's main unaltered, ha in clearly bono fl ted. \ 

■mailer proportion of what he prodnoei ii raffioient to put that laboui In! • 
•ndslargei proportion consequently remaineforhimielf. N ("Outlines©! Pol 1 
London, L882, pp. 19, 60.) 



J 



08 Capitalist Production. 



creates in equal periods of time greater values than average 
social labour of the same kind. (See Ch. I. Sect. 1. p. 11.) But 
our capitalist still continues to pay as before only five shillings 
as the value of a day's labour-power. Hence, instead of 10 
hours, the labourer need now work only 7i hours, in order to 
re-produce this value. His surplus-labour is, therefore, in- 
creased by 2| hours, and the surplus- value he produces grows 
from one, into three shillings. Hence, the capitalist who 
applies the improved method of production, appropriates to 
surplus-labour a greater portion of the working day, than the 
other capitalists in the same trade. He does individually, 
what the whole body of capitalists engaged in producing re- 
lative surplus-value, do collectively. On the other hand, 
however, this extra surplus-value vanishes, so soon as the new 
method of production has become general, and has consequently 
caused the difference between the individual value of the 
cheapened commodity and its social value to vanish. The law 
of the determination of value by labour-time, a law which 
brings under its sway the individual capitalist who applies 
the new method of production, by compelling him to sell his 
goods under their social value, this same law, acting as a co- 
ercive law of competition, forces his competitors to adopt the 
new method. 1 The general rate of surplus-value is, therefore, 
ultimately affected by the whole process, only when the in- 
crease in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon those 
branches of production that are connected with, and has 
cheapened those commodities that form part of, the necessary 
means of subsistence, and are therefore elements of the value 
of labour-power. 

The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the produc- 
tiveness of labour. And so, too, is the value of labour-power, 
because it depends on the values of commodities. Relative 

1 " If my neighbour by doing much with little labour, can sell cheap, I must con- 
trive to sell as cheap as he. So that every art, trade, or engine, doing work with 
labour of fewer hands, and consequently cheaper, begets in others a kind of necessity 
and emulation, either of using the same art, trade, or engine, or of inventing some 
thing like it, that every man may be upon the square, that no man may be able to 
undersell his neighbour." (" The Advantages of the East India Trade to England/ 
J<ondon, 1720, p. 67.) 



The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value, 309 

surplus-value is, on the contrary, directly proportional to that 
productiveness. It rises with rising and falls with falling 
productiveness. The value of money being assumed to be 
constant, an average social working day of 12 hours always 
produces the same new value, six shillings, no matter how this 
sum ma} T be apportioned between surplus-value and wages. 
But if, in consequence of increased productiveness, the value 
of the necessaries of life fall, and the value of a day's labour- 
power be thereby reduced from five shillings to three, the box • 
plus-value increases from one shilling to three. Ten hours 
were necessary for the reproduction of the value of the labour- 
power ; now only six are required. Four hours have been set 
free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus-labour. 
Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination and constant 
tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to 
cheapen commodities, and by such cheapening to cheapen the 
labourer himself. 1 

The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the 
capitalist. What alone interests him, is the surplus-value that 
dwells in it, and is realisable by sale. Realisation of the sur- 
plus-value necessarily carries with it the refunding of the value 
that was advanced. Now, since relative surplus-value in- 
creases in direct proportion to the development of the produc- 
tiveness of labour, while, on the other hand, the value of com- 
modities diminishes in the same proportion ; since one and the 
same process cheapens commodities, and augments the surplus- 
value contained in them; we have here the solution of the 
riddle: why does the capitalist, whose sole concern is the pro- 
duction of exchange-value, continually strive to depress the 
exchange-value of commodities? A riddle with which Quesoay, 

1 "In whatever pro porti on the expenses of a labourer ire diminished, la I 

proportion will his wages be diminished, if the restreinti upon industry are nt 

same time taken off." (" Oonftidi rations concerning taking ofl the County <>n ( Ion Bl 

ported," &c, Lond., 1753, p. 7.) "The Interest of trade requires, that eon and *J] 
provisions should he a« oheap ai possible ; for whatever makes then dear, most d 
labour dear also ... in all oountriee, when- Industry is not restrained, the pri 

provisions must affect the price of laboUT. This will always he diminished wh- n thr 
MUriee of life grow cheaper." (1. c. p. 3.) "Wages aro decreased in the I 

proportion U fin- powers of production increase. Machinery, it is true, cheapen* th< 

sarics of life, hut it also cheapens the labourer." ("A Pi m B 

Comparative Merits of Competition and I i'i<>n." London, L8S4 a p. J7.) 



310 Capitalist Production. 

one of the founders of political economy, tormented his 
opponents, and to which they could give him no answer. 
" You acknowledge," he says, "that the more expenses and the 
cost of labour can, in the manufacture of industrial products, 
be reduced without injury to production, the more advantage- 
ous is such reduction, because it diminishes the price of the 
finished article. And yet. you believe that the production of 
wealth, which arises from the labour of the workpeople, con- 
sists in the augmentation of the exchange-value of their 
products." 1 

The shortening of the working day is, therefore, by no 
means what is aimed at, in capitalist production, when labour 
is economised by increasing its productiveness. 2 It is only the 
shortening of the labour-time, necessary for the production of 
a definite quantity of commodities, that is aimed at. The fact 
that the workman, when the productiveness of his labour has 
been increased, produces, say 10 times as many commodities as 
before, and thus spends one-tenth as much labour- time on each, 
by no means prevents him from continuing to work 12 hours as 
1 efore, nor from producing in those 12 hours 1200 articles in- 
stead of 120. Nay, more, his working day may be prolonged 
at the same time, so as to make him produce, say 1400 articles 
in 14 hours. In the treatises, therefore, of economists of the 
stamp of MacCulloch, Ure, Senior, and tutti quanti, we may 
read upon one page, that the labourer owes a debt of gratitude 
to capital for developing his productiveness, because the 
necessary labour-time is thereby shortened, and on the next 
page, that he must prove his gratitude by working in future 

1 " lis conviennent que plus on peut, sans prejudice, epargner de frais ou de travaux 
dispendieux dans la fabrication des ouvrages des artisans, plus cette epargne est pro- 
fitable par la diminution des prix de ces ouvrages. Cependant ils croient que la pro- 
duction de richesse qui resulte des travaux des artisans consiste dans Faugmentation 
de la valeur venale de leurs ouvrages. " (Quesnay : ' ' Dialogues sur le Commerce et sur 
les Travaux des artisans," pp. 188, 189.) 

2 "Ces speculateurs si economes du travail des ouvriers qu'il faudrait qu'ils pay- 
assent." (J. N. liidaut : "Du Monopole qui s'etablit dans les arts industriels et le 
commerce." Paris, 1828, p. 13.) "The employer will be always on the stretch to 
economise time and labour.' : (Dugald Stewart: Works ed. by Sir W. Hamilton. 
Kdinburgh, v. viii., 1855. Lectures on Polit. Econ., p. 318.) "Their (the capitalists') 
interest is that the productive powers of the labourers they employ should be the 
greatest possible. On promoting that power their attention is fixed and almost ex- 
clusively fixed " (H. Jones : 1 c. Lecture III.) 



Co-Operation. 311 

for 15 hours instead of 10. The object of all development of 
the productiveness of labour, within the limits of capitalist 
production, is to shorten that part of the working day, during 
which the workman must labour for his own benefit, and by 
that very shortening, to lengthen the other part of the day, 
during which he is at liberty to work gratis for the capitalist. 
How far this result is also attainable, without cheapening 
commodities, will appear from an examination of the particular 
modes of producing relative surplus-value, to which examina- 
tion we now proceed. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

CO-OPERATION. 



Capitalist production only then really begins, as we have 
already seen, when each individual capital employs simultane- 
ously a comparatively large number of labourers ; when conse- 
quently the labour-process is carried on on an extensive scale 
and yields, relatively, large quantities of products. A greater 
number of labourers working together, at the same time, in 
one place (or, if you will, in the same field of labour), in order 
to produce the same sort of commodity under the mastership 
of one capitalist, constitutes, both historically and logically, 
the starting point of capitalist production. With regard to 
the iii(xl(5 of production itself, manufacture, in its strict mean 
ing, is hardly to be distinguished, in its earliest stages, from 
the handicraft trades of the guilds, otherwise than by the 
greater number of workmen simultaneously employed by cue 
and the same individual capital. The workshop of the 
mediaeval master handicraftsman is simply enlarged. 

At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative. We 
have shown that the surplus-value produced by a given capital 
is equal to the surplus-value produced by each workman mul- 
tiplied by the number of workmen simultaneously employed, 
The Dumber of workmen in itself does not affect, either the 1 
of sin plus-value, or the degree of exploitation oflabour pof 
If a working day of 12 hours be embodied in six shilling I 



312 Capitalist Production. 

such days will be embodied in 1200 times 6 shillings. In one 
case 12 x 1200 working hours, and in the other 12 such hours 
are incorporated in the product. In the production of value 
a number of workmen rank merely as so many individual 
workmen ; and it therefore makes no difference in the value 
produced whether the 1200 men work separately, or united 
under the control of one capitalist. 

Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes 
place. The labour realised in value, is labour of an average 
social quality ; is consequently the expenditure of average 
labour-power. Any average magnitude, however, is merely 
the average of a number of separate magnitudes all of one 
kind, but differing as to quantity. In every industry, each 
individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, differs from the 
average labourer. These individual differences, or " errors " 
as they are called in mathematics, compensate one another, 
and vanish, whenever a certain minimum number of workmen 
are employed together. The celebrated sophist and sycophant, 
Edmund Burke, goes so far as to make the following assertion, 
based on his practical observations as a farmer ; viz., that " in 
so small a platoon" as that of five farm labourers, all indi- 
vidual differences in the labour vanish, and that consequently 
any given five adult farm labourers taken together, will in the 
same time do as much work as any other five. 1 But, however 
that may be, it is clear, that the collective working day of a 
large number of workmen simultaneously employed, divided 
by the number of these workmen, gives one day of average 
social labour. For example, let the working day of each 
individual be 12 hours. Then the collective working day of 
12 men simultaneously employed, consists of 144 hours; and 
although the labour of each of the dozen men may deviate 

1 "Unquestionably, there is a good deal of difference between the value of one 
man's labour and that of another from strength, dexterity, and honest application. 
But I am quite sure, from my best observation, that any given five men will, in their 
total, afford a proportion of labour equal to any other five within the periods of life I 
have stated ; that is, that among such five men there will be one possessing all the 
qualifications of a good workman, one bad, and the other three middling, and ap- 
proximating to the first and the last. So that in so small a platoon as that of even 
five, you will find the full complement of all that five men can earn." (E. Burke, 1. 
c. p. If), 10). Compare Quetelet on the average individual. 



Co-Operation. 



3 1 j 



more or less from average social labour, each of them requiring 
a different time for the same operation, yet since the work- 
ing day of each is one-twelfth of the collective working day 
of 144? hours, it possesses the qualities of an average social 
working day. From the point of view, however, of the capi- 
talist who employs these 12 men, the working day is that of 
the whole dozen. Each individual man's day is an aliquot 
part of the collective working day, no matter whether the 12 
men assist one another in their work, or whether the connexion 
between their operations consists merely in the fact, that the 
men are all working for the same capitalist. But if the 12 
men are employed in six pairs, by as many different small 
masters, it will be quite a matter of chance, whether each of 
these masters produces the same value, and consequently 
whether he realises the general rate of surplus-value. Devia- 
tions would occur in individual cases. If one workman re- 
quired considerably more time for the production of a com- 
modity than is socially necessary, the duration of the necessary 
labour-time would, in his case, sensibly deviate from the 
labour-time socially necessary on an average; and consequently 
his labour would not count as average labour, nor his labour- 
power as average labour-power. It would either be not sale- 
able at all, or only at something below the average vahie of 
labour-power. A fixed minimum of efficiency in all labour i^ 
therefore assumed, and we shall see, later on, that capita- 
list production provides the means of fixing this minimum. 
Nevertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, al- 
though on the other hand the capitalist has to pay the aver 
value of labour-power. Of the six small masters, one would 
therefore squeeze out more than the average rate <>f surplus- 
value, another less. The inequalities would be compensated 
for the society at large, but not for the individual mast 
Thus the laws of the production of value are only fully realised 
for the individual producer, when he produces as acapitaiiat, 
and employes a number of workmen together, whose labour, 
by its collective nature, is at one.- stamped as avert 

labour.' 

1 I'rofeHHor ItoHchrr claim* to hftVf dltOOVtred that oik- need 



314 Capitalist Production. 

Even without an alteration in the system of working, the 
simultaneous employment of a large number of labourers 
effects a revolution in the material conditions of the labour- 
process. The buildings in which they work, the store-houses 
for the raw material, the implements and utensils used simul- 
taneously or in turns by the workmen ; in short, a portion of 
the means of production, are now consumed in common. On 
the one hand, the exchange-value of these means of production 
is not increased ; for the exchange-value of a commodity is not 
raised by its use- value being consumed more thoroughly and to 
greater advantage. On the other hand, they are used in com- 
mon, and therefore on a larger scale than before. A room 
where twenty weavers work at twenty looms must be larger 
than the room of a single weaver with two assistants. But it 
costs less labour to build one workshop for twenty persons 
than to build ten to accommodate two weavers each ; thus 
the value of the means of production that are concentrated for 
use in common on a large scale does not increase in direct pro- 
portion to the expansion and to the increased useful effect of 
those means. When consumed in common, they give up a 
smaller part of their value to each single product ; partly 
because the total value they part with is spread over a greater 
quantity of products, and partly because their value, though 
absolutely greater, is, having regard to their sphere of action in 
the process, relatively less than the value of isolated means of 
production. Owing to this, the value of a part of the constant 
capital falls, and in proportion to the magnitude of the fall, the 
total value of the commodity also falls. The effect is the same 
as if the means of production had cost less. The economy 
in their application is entirely owing to their being con- 
sumed in common by a large number of workmen. Moreover, 
this character of being necessary conditions of social labour, a 
character that distinguishes them from the dispersed and 
relatively more costly means of production of isolated, inde- 
pendent labourers, or small masters, is acquired even when the 

Mrs. Roscher during two days, does more work than two needlewomen employed 
together during one day. The learned professor should not study the capitalist pro- 
cess of production in the nursery, nor under circumstances where the principal per- 
sonage, the capitalist, is wanting. 



Co-Operation. 



J'O 



numerous workmen assembled together do not assist one 
another, but merely work side by side. A portion of the 
instruments of labour acquires this social character before the 
labour-process itself does so. 

Economy in the use of the means of production has to be 
considered under two aspects. First, as cheapening commodi- 
ties, and thereby bringing about a fall in the value of labour- 
power. Secondly, as altering the ratio of the surplus-value to 
the total capital advanced, i.e., to the sum of the values of the 
constant and variable capital. The latter aspect will not be 
considered until we come to the third book, to which, with the 
object of treating them in their proper connexion, we also 
relegate many other points that relate to the present question. 
The march of our analysis compels this splitting up of the 
subject matter, a splitting up that is quite in keeping with the 
spirit of capitalist production. For since, in this mode of pro- 
duction, the workman finds the instruments of labour existing 
independently of him as another man's property, economy in 
their use appears, with regard to him, to be a distinct operation, 
one that does not concern him, and which, therefore, has no 
connextion with the methods by which his -own personal pro- 
ductiveness is increased. 

When numerous labourers work together side by Bide, 
whether in one and the same process, or in different but con- 
nect ed processes, they are said to co-operate, or to work in co- 
operation. 1 

Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or tin' 
defensive power of a regiment of infantry, is essentially 
different from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers ol 
the individual cavalry or infantry soldiers taken separately, 80 
the sum total of the mechanical forces exerted by isolated 
workmen differs from the social force that is developed, when 
many hands take part simultaneously in one ami (he same un- 
divided operation, such as raising a heavy weight, (urn'n 
winch, or removing an obstacle. 2 In such cases the effeel <»t 

1 " Oonooom cU forces." (Dwtutt <!<• Traoy, L o., p. 78.) 

1 " There are numerous operations of so simple a kin.l ;\s not to idinil n dil 
into part*, which cannot he performed without thl 'ion of 

hands. I would instance the lifting of a Lar^' tr. . ■ m n. . . . e\.i\tln: 



3 1 6 Capitalist Production. 

the combined labour could either not be produced at all by 
isolated individual labour, or it could only be produced by a 
great expenditure of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. Not 
only have we here an increase in the productive power of the 
individual, by means of co-operation, but the creation of a new 
power, namely, the collective power of masses. 1 

Apart from the new power that arises from the fusion of 
many forces into one single force, mere social contact begets in 
most industries an emulation and a stimulation of the animal 
spirits that heighten the efficiency of each individual workman. 
Hence it is that a dozen persons working together will, in 
their collective working-day of 144 hours, produce far more 
than twelve isolated men each working 12 hours, or than one 
man who works twelve days in succession. 2 The reason of 
this is that man is, if not as Aristotle contends, a political, 3 at 
all events a social animal. 

Although a number of men may be occupied together at the 
same time on the same, or the same kind of work, yet the 
labour of each, as a part of the collective labour, may corres- 
pond to a distinct phase of the labour-process, through all whcse 
phases, in consequence of co-operation, the subject of their 
labour passes with greater speed. For instance, if a dozen 
masons place themselves in a row, so as to pass stones from the 

short, which cannot be done unless a great many pairs of hands help each other in 
the same undivided employment and at the same time " (E. G. Wakefield : " A View of 
the Art of Colonisation." London : 1849, p. 168). 

1 " As one man cannot, and ten men must strain to lift a tun of weight, yet 100 
men can do it only by the strength of a finger of each of them. " (John Bellers : " Pro- 
posals for raising a Colledge of Industry." London, 1696, p. 21.) 

" 2 " There is also " (when the same number of men are employed by one farmer on 
300 acres, instead of by ten farmers with 30 acres a piece) " an advantage in the pro- 
portion of servants, which will not so easily be understood but by practical men ; for it 
is natural to say, as 1 is to 4, so are 3 : to 12 : but this will not hold good in practice ; 
for in harvest time and many other operations which require that kind of despatch 
by the throwing many hands together, the work is better and more expeditiously 
done : f . i. in harvest, 2 drivers, 2 loaders, 2 pitchers, 2 rakers, and the rest at the 
rick, or in the barn, will despatch double the work that the same number of hands 
would do if divided into different gangs on different farms." ("An Inquiry into the 
connection between the present Price of Provisions and the Size of Farms." By a 
Farmer. London, 1773, pp. 7, 8.) 

3 Strictly, Aristotle's definition is that man is by nature a town -citizen. This is 
quite as characteristic of ancient classical society as Franklin's definition of man, as 
a tool-making animal, is characteristic of Yankeedom. 



Co-Operation. 3 1 7 

foot of a ladder to its summit, each of them does the same 
thing ; nevertheless, their separate acts form connected parts of 
one total operation ; they are particular phases, which inu.^t 
he gone through by each stone ; and the stones are thus 
carried up quicker by the 24 hands of the row of men than 
they could be if each man went separately up and down the 
ladder with his burden. 1 The object is carried over the same 
distance in a shorter time. Again, a combination of labour 
occurs whenever a building, for instance, is taken in hand on 
different sides simultaneously ; although here also the co- 
operating masons are doing the same, or the same kind of 
work. The 12 masons, in their collective working day of 144 
hours, make much more progress with the building than one 
mason could make working for 12 days, or 144 hours. The 
reason is, that a body of men working in concert has hands and 
eyes both before and behind, and is, to a certain degree, omni- 
present. The various parts of the work progress simul- 
taneously. 

In the above instances we have laid stress upon the point 
that the men do the same, or the same kind of work, because 
this, the most simple form of labour in common, plays a great 
part in co-operation, even in its most fully developed stage. 
If the work be complicated, then the mere number of the men 
who co-operate allows of the various operations being appor- 
tioned to different hands, and, consequently, of being carried 
on simultaneously. The time necessary for the completion of 
the whole work is thereby shortened. 1 

1 " On doit encore remarquer que cette division partielle de travail pent so faire 
quand ineme 1i:h ouvriers Hont occupesd'une meme besognc. Dai maopni par e xemplt . 
oecupee a faire patter de maim an maim des briquet a mi eohafaudage luperienr, font 

touB la m6me beiogna, ct pourtant il existc parmi eux one atp606 de division de travail, 
qui oonaitte en ce que cbacun d'eux fait passer la briqne par on eepaoe donnt, et <i'i< 
tous ensemble la font parrenir beaueoup plus promptement • L'endroM marque' quili 
nele feraient si ohaoun d'eux portaii »a brique i6paremeni jutqn a I'eokafaudafe 

BUperieur," (F. Skarbck : " Tbcorie des ricbesses Hociales." l'.m-, 1829 t 1 

pp. i)7, 9a) 

a "Kat-il question d'executer un travail complique, plnaiauri ohotei d«>i\tiit 

faitee timultanement. L'un en fait one pendant qua Ltatra en fail nneantn 

toug contribuent a L'effet qu'un seul bomine n'aurait pu pn»duii.\ l/un rMM p« mUtit 

que l'autre tient legouvetnafl, at qu'un troiaieuM jette le filet on harponne 

at lapeehe a un lUOOil impossible sans ce cuncours." (Dtbtutt de Tracy. 1. c.J 



3 1 8 Capitalist Production. 

In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by 
the nature of the process, during which certain definite results 
must be obtained. For instance, if a flock of sheep has to be 
shorn, or a field of wheat to be cut and harvested, the quantity 
and quality of the product depends on the work being begun 
and ended within a certain time. In these cases, the time 
that ought to be taken by the process is prescribed, just as it 
is in herring fishing. A single person cannot carve a working 
day of more than, say 12 hours, out of the natural day, but 100 
men co-operating extend the working day to 1,200 hours. 
The shortness of the time allowed for the work is compensated 
for by the large mass of labour thrown upon the field of pro- 
duction at the decisive moment. The completion of the task 
within the proper time depends on the simultaneous applica- 
tion of numerous combined working days ; the amount of use- 
ful effect depends on the number of labourers ; this number, 
however, is always smaller than the number of isolated 
labourers required to do the same amount of work in the same 
period. 1 It is owing to the absence of this kind of co-opera- 
tion that, in the western part of the United States, quantities 
of corn, and in those parts of East India where English rule has 
destroyed the old communities, quantities of cotton, are yearly 
wasted. 2 

On the one hand, co-operation allows of the work being 
carried on over an extended space ; it is consequently impera- 
tively called for in certain undertakings, such as draining, con- 
structing dykes, irrigation works, and the making of canals, 
roads and railwavs. On the other hand, while extending the 

1 "The doing of it (agricultural work) at the critical juncture is of so much the 
greater consequence." (" An Inquiry into the Connection between the Present Price,'" 
&c, p. 9.) "In agriculture, there is no more important factor than that of time." 
(Liebig : " Ueber Theorie und Praxis in der Landwirthschaft. " 1850. p. 23.) 

2 " The next evil is one which one would scarcely expect to find in a country which 
exports more labour than any other in the world, with the exception, perhaps, of 
China and England — the impossibility of procuring a sufficient number of hands to 
clean the cotton. The consequence of this is that large quantities of the crop are left 
unpicked, while another portion is gathered from the ground when it has fallen, and 
is of course discoloured and partially rotted, so that for want of labour at the proper 
season the cultivator is actually forced to submit to the loss of a large part of that 
crop for which England is so anxiously looking." (Bengal Hurkaru. Bi-Mouthly 
Overland Summary of News, 22nd July, 1801.) 



Co- Operation . 319 

scale of production, it renders possible a relative contraction of 
the arena. This contraction of arena simultaneous with, and 
arising from, extension of scale, whereby a number of useless 
expenses are cut down, is owing to the conglomeration of 
labourers, to the aggregation of various processes, and to the 
concentration of the means ,of production. 1 

The combined working day produces, relatively to an equal 
sum of isolated working-days, a greater quantity of use-values, 
and, consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the 
production of a given useful effect. Whether the combined 
working-day, in a given case, acquires this increased produc- 
tive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of labour, 
or extends its sphere of action over a greater space, or con- 
tracts the field of production relatively to the scale of produc- 
tion, or at the critical moment sets large masses of labour to 
work, or excites emulation between individuals and raises their 
animal spirits, or impresses on the similar operations carried on 
by a number of men the stamp of continuity and many-sided- 
ness, or performs simultaneously different operations, or econo- 
mises the means of production by use in common, or lends to 
individual labour the character of average social labour — which- 
ever of these be the cause of the increase, the special produc- 
tive power of the combined working day is, under all circum- 
stances, the social productive power of labour, or the productive 
power of social labour. This power is due to co-operation 
itself. When the labourer co-operates systematically with 
others, he strips off the fetters of his individuality, and de- 
velopes the capabilities of his species. 8 

As a general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being 
brought together: their assemblage in one place is a necessary 

1 In the progress of culture "all, and perhaps more than all, the capital and labour 
which once loosely occupied 500 acres, are now concentrated for the inoro compl< t< 
tillage of 100." Although " relatively to the amount of capital and labour employed, 
•pace is concentrated, it is an enlarged sphere of production, as oompered t<> tin 
■phero of production formerly occupied or worked upon by one single Independent 
agent of production." (It. Jones: "An Essay on tho Distribution of Wealth," pari I 
On Rent. London, 1831, p. 191.) 

* " La forza di ciascuno uomo c rrvnima, ma la riunione d. lie minime foi 
una fona totalo inaggioro anche dclla Bomma dolle forzo rood Oil ffUl BlM a oh* M forr.< 
per ensure riunito possono diminuere il tempo ed aeerescere lo spazjo dclla loro erf 
(O. U. Carli, Note to P. Vcrri, 1. c. t.. xv. p. 1%.) 



320 Capitalist Production. 

condition of their co-operation. Hence wage labourers cannot 
co-operate, unless they are employed simultaneously by the 
same capital, the same capitalist, and unless therefore their 
labour-powers are bought simultaneously by him. The total 
value of these labour-powers, or the amount of the wages of 
these labourers for a day, or a week, as the case may be, must 
be ready in the pocket of the capitalist, before the workmen 
are assembled for the process of production. The payment of 
300 workmen at once, though only for one day, requires a 
greater outlay of capital, than does the payment of a smaller 
number of men, week by week, during a whole year. Hence 
the number of the labourers that co-operate, or the scale of 
co-operation, depends, in the first instance, on the amount of 
capital that the individual capitalist can spare for the purchase 
of labour-power ; in other words, on the extent to which a 
single capitalist has command over the means of subsistence of 
a number of labourers. 

And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital. 
For example, the outlay on raw material is 30 times as great, 
for the capitalist who employs 300 men, as it is for each of 
the 30 capitalists who employ 10 men. The value and quan- 
tity of the instruments of labour used in common do not, it is 
true, increase at the same rate as the number of workmen, but 
they do increase very considerably. Hence, concentration of 
large masses of the means of production in the hands of indi- 
vidual capitalists, is a material condition for the co-operation 
of wage-labourers, and the extent of the co-operation or the 
scale of production, depends on the extent of this concentration. 

We saw in a former chapter, that a certain minimum amount 
of capital was necessary, in order that the number of labourers 
simultaneously employed, and, consequently, the amount of 
surplus-value produced, might suffice to liberate the employer 
himself from manual labour, to convert him from a small 
master into a capitalist, and thus formally to establish capita- 
list production. We now see that a certain minimum amount 
is a necessary condition for the conversion of numerous isolated 
and independent processes into one combined social process. 

We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital 



Co-Ofte?'ation. 321 

was only a formal result of the fact, that the labourer, instead 
of working for himself, works for and consequently under the 
capitalist. By the co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, 
the sway of capital developes into a requisite for carrying on 
the labour-process itself, into a real requisite of production. 
That a capitalist should command on the field of production, 
is now as indispensable as that a general should command on 
the field of battle. 

All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a 
directing authority, in order to secure the harmonious working 
of the individual activities, and to perform the general func- 
tions that have their origin in the action of the combined 
organism, as distinguished from the action of its separate 
organs. A single violin player is his own conductor ; an 
orchestra requires a separate one. The work of directing, 
superintending, and adjusting, becomes one of the functions of 
capita], from the moment that the labour under the control of 
capital, becomes co-operative. Once a function of capital, it 
acquires special characteristics. 

The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist produc- 
tion, is to extract the greatest possible amount of surplus- 
value, 1 and consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest 
possible extent. As the number of the co-operating labourers 
increases, so too does their resistance to the domination of 
capital, and with it, the necessity for capital to overcome this 
resistance by counter-pressure. The control exercised by the 
capitalist is not only a special function, due to the nature of 
the social labour-process, and peculiar to that process, but it is, 
at the same time, a function of the exploitation of a social 
labour-process, and is consequently rooted in the unavoidable 
antagonism between the exploiter and the living and labouring 
raw material he exploits. 

Again, in proportion to the increasing mass of the means of 
production, now no longer the property of the Labourer, but 
of the capitalist, the necessity increases for some effective 
control over the proper application of those means. 1 Moreover, 

1 " Profits ... is the sole end of trade." (J. Vandrrlint. 1. 0., p. LI.) 
•That Philistine paper, the Spectator, itatei that after the Introduction ri 
a sort of partnership between oapitaliit and workmen in the " IHrewerh Oompanj 



322 Capitalist Production. 

the co-operation of wage labourers is entirely brought about 
by the capital that employs them. Their union into one 
single productive body and the establishment of a connexion 
between their individual functions, are matters foreign and 
external to them, are not their own act, but the act of the 
capital that brings and keeps them together. Hence the con- 
nexion existing between their various labours appears to them, 
ideally, in the shape of a preconceived plan of the capitalist, 
and practically in the shape of the authority of the same capi- 
talist, in the shape of the powerful will of another, who sub- 
jects their activity to his aims. If, then, the control of the 
capitalist is in substance twofold by reason of the twofold 
nature of the process of production itself, — which, on the one 
hand, is a social process for producing use- values, on the 
other, a process for creating surplus-value — in form that con- 
trol is despotic. As co-operation extends its scale, this despot- 
ism takes forms peculiar to itself. Just as at first the capi- 
talist is relieved from actual labour so soon as his capital has 
reached that minimum amount with which capitalist pro- 
duction, as such, begins, so now, he hands over the work of 
direct and constant supervision of the individual workmen, 
and groups of workmen, to a special kind of wage labourer 
An industrial army of workmen, under the command of a 
capitalist, requires, like a real army, officers (managers), and 
sergeants (foremen, overlookers), who, while the work is being 
done, command in the name of the capitalist. The work of 
supervision becomes their established and exclusive function. 
When comparing the mode of production of isolated peasants 
and artizans with production by slave labour, the political 
economist counts this labour of superintendence among the 
fauxfrais of production. But, when considering the capital- 

of Manchester," " the first result was a sudden decrease in waste, the men not 
seeing wliy they should waste their own property any more than any other 
master's, and waste is, perhaps, next to had debts, the greatest source of manufactur- 
ing loss." The same paper finds that the main defect in the Rochdale co-operative 
experiments is this: "They showed that associations of workmen could manage 
shops, mills, and almost all forms of industry with success, and they immediately 
improved the condition of the men ; but then they did not leave a clear place for 
masters." Quelle honour 1 

J Professor Cairns, after stating that the superintendence of labour is a leading 



Co- Operation. 3 2 3 

ist mode of production, he, on the contrary, treats the work 
of control made necessary by the co-operative character of tin- 
labour process as identical with the different work of control, 
necessitated by the capitalist character of that process and tin- 
antagonism of interests between capitalist and labourer. 1 It 
is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is b 
capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of industry because 
he is a capitalist. The leadership of industry is an attribute 
of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general and 
judge were attributes of landed property. 2 

The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has 
done bargaining for its sale with the capitalist; and he can 
sell no more than what he has — i.e., his individual, 
lated labour-power. This state of things is in no way alte 
by the fact that the capitalist, instead of buying the labour- 
power of one man, buys that of 100, and enters into separate 
[Contracts with 100 unconnected men instead of with one. Be 
is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, without letting then: 
o (-operate. He pays them the value of 100 independent 
labour-powers, but he does not pay for the combined labour- 
power of the hundred. Being independent -of each other, the 
labourers are isolated persons, who enter into relations with 
the capitalist, but not with one another. This CO-operation 
begins only with the labour process, but thev have then ceased 
to belong to themselves. On entering that process, the} b 
conn; incorporated with capital. As co-operators, as meml 
of a working organism, they are but special mod a of race 

of capital. Hence, the productive power developed by the 
labourer when working in co-operation, is the productive 

re of production l>y ilave* In tin- Southern > North Ameriea, oontii 

1 The peasant proprietor (of the North), Appropriating the whole product of bi 

no other itimulu rtion. Superintendence is here completely di 

with." (Oairnes, 1. <■., pp, 18, 19.) 

■sir Jamei Steuart, i writer altogether remarkable foi hii [uid 
•haracteri d distinction* between different mode* of produ tion, 

do large under! ikings in the tnanufaotui Ing way ruin pi ivate industry, bul bj 

i to the simplicity of slaves ? " (" Prin. of Pol. Boon.," London, 1767, ». I 
Ki7, 168.) 

2 An »mtc ami \\\< sohool might therefore li i\'- shown that f< 

m eternal ty in tho same wa] thai thsjy hart done in the »..i*« ..:' tl;. I 

. it.il. 



324 Capitalist Production. 

power of capital. This power is developed gratuitously, when- 
ever the workmen are placed under given conditions, and it is 
capital that places them under such conditions. Because this 
power costs capital nothing, and because, on the other hand, 
the labourer himself does not develop it before his labour 
belongs to capital, it appears as a power with which capital 
is endowed by Nature — a productive power that is immanent 
in capital. 

The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in 
the gigantic structures of the ancient Asiatics, Egyptians, 
Etruscans, &c. " It has happened in times past that these 
Oriental States, after supplying the expenses of their civil and 
military establishments, have found themselves in possession 
of a surplus which they could apply to works of magnificence 
or utility, and in the construction of these their command over 
the hands and arms of almost the entire non-agricultural 
population has produced stupendous monuments which still 
indicate their power. The teeming valley of the Nile . . . 
produced food for a swarming non-agricultural population, and 
this food, belonging to the monarch and the priesthood, afforded 
the means of erecting the mighty monuments which filled the 
land. ... In moving the colossal statues and vast masses of 
which the transport creates wonder, human labour almost 
alone, was prodigally used. . . . The number of the labourers and 
the concentration of their efforts sufficed. We see mighty coral 
reefs rising from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm 
land, yet each individual depositor is puny, weak, and con- 
temptible. The non-agricultural labourers of an Asiatic 
monarchy have little but their individual bodily exertions to 
bring to the task, but their number is their strength, and the 
power of directing these masses gave rise to the palaces and 
temples, the pyramids, and the armies of gigantic statues of 
which the remains astonish and perplex us. It is that con- 
finement of the revenues which feed them, to one or a few 
hands, which makes such undertakings possible." 1 This power 

1 R. Jones. "Text-book of Lectures," &c, pp. 77, 78. The ancient Assyrian, 
Egyptian, and other collections in London, and in other European capitals, make 
us eye-witnesses of the modes of carrying on that co-operative labour. 



Co- Operation. 325 

of Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &c, has in 
modern society been transferred to the capitalist, whether he 
be an isolated, or as in joint stock companies, a collective 
capitalist. 

Co-operation, sucli as we find it at the dawn of human 
development, among races who live by the chase, 1 or, say, in 
the agriculture of Indian communities, is based, on the one 
hand, on ownership in common of the means of production, 
and on the olher hand, on the fact, that in those cases, each 
individual has no more torn himself oil* from the navel- 
string of his tribe or community, than each bee has freed 
itself from connexion with the hive. Such co-operation is 
distinguished from capitalistic co-operation by both of the 
above characteristics. The sporadic application of co-operation 
on a large scale in ancient times, in the middle ages, and in 
modern colonies, reposes on relations of dominion and servi- 
tude, principally on slavery. The capitalistic form, on the 
contrary, presupposes from first to last, the free wage labourer, 
who sells his labour-power to capital. Historically, however, 
this form is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture 
and to the carrying on of independent handicrafts whether in 
guilds or not. 2 From the standpoint of these, capitalistic co- 
operation does not manifest itself as a particular historical 
form of co-operation, but co-operation itself appears to be a 
historical form peculiar to, and specifically distinguishing, the 
capitalist process of production. 

Just as the social productive power of labour that is de- 
veloped by co-operation, appears to be the productive power 
of capital, so co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of 
production carried on by isolated independent labourers, or 
even by small employers, appears to be a specific form of the 

1 Linguet is probably right, when in his"Theorie des Lois Civiles," he <1< d.u. 
hunting to be the first form of co-operation, and man-hunting (war) one of ti 
forms of hunting. 

■ Peasant agriculture on a small scale, and the carrying on of independent hand: 
crafts, which together form the basis of the feudal mode of production, and 
the dissolution of that system, continue side by side witli the capitalist mod< 
form the economic foundation of the classical communities at theil I MM 

primitive form of ownership of land in common had disappear* 1. and before ila 

bad leized on production in earnest. 



326 Capitalist Production. 

capitalist process of production. It is the first change experi- 
enced by the actual labour-process, when subjected to capi tal 
This change takes place spontaneously. The simultaneous 
employment of a large number of wage-labourers, in one and 
the same process, which is a necessary condition of this change, 
also forms the starting point of capitalist production. This 
point coincides with the birth of capital itself. If then, on the 
one hand, the capitalist mode of production presents itself to 
us historically, as a necessary condition to the transformation 
of the labour-process into a social process, so, on the other hand, 
this social form of the labour-process presents itself, as a method 
employed by capital for the more profitable exploitation of 
labour, by increasing that labour's productiveness. 

In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto 
viewed it, co-operation is a necessary concomitant of all pro- 
duction on a large scale, but it does not, in itself, represent 
a fixed form characteristic of a particular epoch in the develop- 
ment of the capitalist mode of production. At the most it 
appears to do so, and that only approximately, in the handi- 
craft-like beginnings of manufacture, 1 and in that kind of 
agriculture on a large scale, which corresponds to the epoch of 
manufacture, and is distinguished from peasant agriculture, 
mainly by the number of the labourers simultaneously em- 
ployed, and by the mass of the means of production con- 
centrated for their use. Simple co-operation is always the 
prevailing form, in those branches of production in which 
capital operates on a large scale, and division of labour and 
machinery play but a subordinate part. 

Co-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the 
capitalist mode of production ; nevertheless, the elementary 
form of co-operation continues to subsist as a particular form 
of capitalist production side by side with the more developed 
forms of that mode of production. 

"Whether the united skill, industry, and emulation of many together on the 
rame work be not the way to advance it? And whether it had been otherwise 
possible for England, to have carried on her Woollen Manufacture to so great a per- 
fection?" (Berkeley. "The Querist." London, 1750, p. 56, par. 521.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture, 327 

CHAPTER XIV. 

DIVISION OF LABOUR AND MANUFACTURE. 

SECTION 1. — TWOFOLD ORIGIN OF MANUFACTURE. 

TnAT co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes 
its typical form in manufacture, and is the prevalent character- 
istic form of the capitalist process of production throughout 
the manufacturing period properly so called. That period, 
roughly speaking, extends from the middle of the 16th to the 
last third of the 18th century. 

Manufacture takes its rise in two ways : — 

(1.) By the assemblage, in one workshop under the control 
of a single capitalist, of labourers belonging to various inde- 
pendent handicrafts, but through whose hands a given article 
must pass on its way to completion. A carnage, for example, 
was formerly the product of the labour of a great number of inde- 
pendent artificers, such as wheelwrights, harness-makers, tailors, 
locksmiths, upholsterers, turners, fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, 
polishers, gilders, &c. In the manufacture of carriages, how- 
ever, all these different artificers are assembled in one build- 
ing, where they work into one another's hands. It is true that 
a carriage cannot be gilt before it has been made. But if a 
number of carriages are being made simultaneously, some may 
he in the hands of the gilders while others are going through an 
earlier process. So far, we are still in the domain of simple 
co-operation, which finds its materials ready to hand in the 
shape of men and things. But very soon an important chai 
takes place. The tailor, the locksmith, and the other artificers, 
being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradu- 
ally loses, through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to 
its full extent, his old handicraft. But, on the other hand, his 
activity now confined in one groove, assumes the form I 
adapted to the narrowed sphere of action. At first, carriage 
manufacture is a combination of various independent handi 
Crafts. By degrees, it becomes the splitting up of can 



2,2 S Capitalist Production. 

making into its various detail processes, each of which 
crystallizes into the exclusive function of a particular work- 
man, the manufacture, as a whole, being carried on by the men 
in conjunction. In the same way, cloth manufacture, as also a 
wdiole series of other manufactures, arose by combining 
different handicrafts together under the control of a single 
capitalist. 1 

(2.) Manufacture also arises in a way exactly the reverse of 
this — namely, by one capitalist employing simultaneously in 
one workshop a number of artificers, who all do the same, or 
the same kind of work, such as making paper, type, or needles. 
This is co-operation in its most elementary form. Each of 
these artificers (with the help, perhaps, of one or two appren- 
tices), makes the entire commodity, and he consequently 
performs in succession all the operations necessary for its 
production. He still works in his old hand icraft-1 ike way. 
But very soon external circumstances cause a different use to 
he made of the concentration of the workmen on one spot, and 
of the simultaneou^ness of their work. An increased quantity 
of the article has perhaps to be delivered within a given time. 
The work is therefore re-distributed. Instead of each man 
being allowed to perforin all the various operations in succes- 
sion, these operations are changed into disconnected, isolated 
ones, carried on side by side ; each is assigned to a different 
artificer, and the whole of them together are performed simul- 
taneously by the co-operating workmen. This accidental 
repartition gets repeated, developes advantages of its own, and 
gradually ossifies into a systematic division of labour. The 

1 To give a more modern instance : The silk spinning and weaving of Lyons and 
Nimes " est toute patriarcale ; clle emploie beaucoup de fcmmes et d'enfants, mais 
sans lcs epuiser ni les corrompre ; elle les laisse dans lenr belles vallees de la Drome, 
du Var, de l'Isere, de Vaucluse, pour y elever desvers etdeviderleurs cocons ; jamais 
elle n'entre dans une veritable fabrique. Pour etreaussibien observe . . . le principe 
de la division du travail s'y rev&t d'un caractere special. II y a bien des devideuses, 
des moulineurs, des teinturiers, des encolleurs, puis des tisserands ; mais ils ne sont pas 
reunis dans un meme etablissement, ne d6pendent pas d'un meme maitre ; tous ils 
Hont independants. " (A.. Blanqui : " Cours d'Econ. Industrielle." Recueilli par A. 
Blaise. Paris, 1838-39, pp. 79). Since Blanqui wrote this, the various independent 
labourers have, to some extent, been united in factories. [And since Marx wrote 
the above, the powerloom has invaded these factories, and is now — 1886— rapidly 
superseding the handloom. Ed.] 



Division of Labottr and Manufacture. 329 

commodity, from being the individual product of an inde- 
pendent artificer, becomes the social product of a union of 
artificers, each of whom performs one, and only one, of the 
constituent partial operations. The same operations which, in 
the case of a papermaker belonging to a German Guild, merged 
one into the other as the successive acts of one artificer, became, 
in the Dutch paper manufacture so many partial operations 
carried on side by side by numerous co-operating labourers. 
The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild was the corner- 
stone on which the English needle manufacture was raised. 
But while in Nuremberg that single artificer performed a series 
of perhaps 20 operations one after another, in England it was 
not long before there were 20 needlemakers side by side, each 
performing one alone of those 20 operations ; and in conse- 
quence of further experience, each of those 20 operations was 
again split up, isolated, and made the exclusive function of a 
separate workman. 

The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of 
handicrafts, is therefore twofold. On the one hand, it arises 
from the union of various independent handicrafts, which become 
stripped of their independence and specialised to such an extent 
as to be reduced to mere supplementary partial processes in the 
production of one particular commodity. On the other hand 
it arises from the co-operation of artificers of one handicraft ; 
it splits up that particular handicraft into its various detail 
operations, isolating, and making these operations independent 
of one another up to the point where each becomes the exclusive 
function of a particular labourer. On the one hand, there! 
manufacture either introduces division of labour into a pro< 
of production, or further developes that division ; on tie 1 other 
band, it unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate. 
But whatever may have been its particular Starting point, its 
final form is invariably the same — a productive mechanism 
whose parts are human beings. 

For a proper understanding of the division of labour in 
Manufacture, it is essential that the following points be firmlv 
grasped. First, the decomposition of a proa of production 

into its various successive steps coincides, here, st 1 ieti \ With 



$3° Capitalist Production. 

the resolution of a handicraft into its successive manual 
operations. Whether complex or simple, each operation has 
to be done by hand, retains the character of a handicraft, and 
is therefore dependent on the strength, skill, quickness, and 
sureness, of the individual workman in handling his tools. 
The handicraft continues to be the basis. This narrow 
technical basis excludes a really scientific analysis of any 
definite process of industrial production, since it is still a con- 
dition that each detail process gone through by the product 
must be capable of being done by hand and of forming, in its 
way, a separate handicraft. It is just because handicraft skill 
continues, in this way, to be the foundation of the process of 
production, that each workman becomes exclusively assigned 
to a partial function, and that for the rest of his life, his labour- 
power is turned into the organ of this detail function. 

Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co- 
operation, and many of its disadvantages spring from the 
general character of co-operation, and not from this particular 
form of it. 

SECTION 2. — THE DETAIL LABOURER AND HIS IMPLEMENTS. 

If we now go more into detail, it is, in the first place, clear 
that a labourer who all his life performs one and the same 
simple operation, converts his whole body into the automatic, 
specialised implement of that operation. Consequently, he 
takes less time in doing it, than the artificer who performs a 
whole series of operations in succession. But the collective 
labourer, who constitutes the living mechanism of manufacture, 
is made up solely of such specialised detail labourers. Hence, 
in comparison with the independent handicraft, more is pro- 
duced in a given time, or the productive power of labour is 
increased. 1 Moreover, when once this fractional work is es- 
tablished as the exclusive function of one person, the methods 
it employs become perfected. The workman's continued 

1 "The more any manufacture of much variety shall be distributed and assigned 
to different artists, the same must needs be better done and with greater expedition, 
with less loss of time and labour." ("The Advantages of the East India Trade, ,: 
Lond., 1720. p. 71.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 3 



j 



repetition of the same simple act, and the concentration of his 
attention on it, teach him by experience how to attain the 
desired effect with the minimum of exertion. But since there 
are always several generations of labourers living at one time, 
and working together at the manufacture of a given article, 
the technical skill, the tricks of the trade thus acquired, 
become established, and are accumulated and handed down. 1 
Manufacture, in fact, produces the skill of the detail labourer, 
by reproducing, and systematically driving to an extreme 
within the workshop, the naturally developed differentiation of 
trades, which it found ready to hand in society at large. On 
the other hand, the conversion of fractional work into the life- 
calling of one man, corresponds to the tendency shown by 
earlier societies, to make trades hereditary; either to petrify 
them into castes, or whenever definite historical conditions 
beget in the individual a tendency to vary in a manner inc. m- 
patible with the nature of castes, to ossify them into guilds. 
Castes and guilds arise from the action of the same natural 
law, that regulates the differentiation of plants and animals 
into species and varieties, except that, when a certain degree 
of* development has been reached, the heredity of castes and 
the exclusiveness of guilds are ordained as a law of society. 
"The muslins of Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece 
goods of Coromandel in brilliant and durable colours, have 
never been surpassed. Yet they are produced without capital, 
machinery, division of labour, or any of those means which 
give such facilities to the manufacturing interest of Europe. 
The weaver is merely a detached individual, working a web 

1 "Easy labour is transmitted skill." (Th. Hodgakin, 1. 0. p. 125). 

2 '* The arts also have ... in Egypt reached the requisite degree of pel f< etion. 
Porit is the only country where artificers may not in any way meddle with the 
affaire of a other clan of citizens, hut must follow that calling alone which by I 
hereditary in their clan In other countriee it is found that tradesman divide 

their attention between too many objects. At one time tliey ti. 

another they take to commerce, at another they busy themselves with two oi throe 
occupations at once. In free countries, they mostly frequent the assembl 

people [n Egypt, on the contrary, every artificer is severely punished if hi 

ned diet with affairsof State, < i on levereJ trades at one*. Tho 

nothing to disturb thoii application to their calling. . . . Moi 
herit from their forefathers numerous rnles, they are 
advantages." (l)iodorus Siculus: BibL Hist. 1. 1. c 74.) 



oj2 Capitalist Product ion. 

when ordered of a customer, and with a loom of the rudest 
construction, consisting sometimes of a few brandies or bars of 
wood, put roughly together. There is even no expedient for 
rolling up the warp ; the loom must therefore be kept 
stretched to its full length, and becomes so inconveniently 
large, that it cannot be contained within the hut of the 
manufacturer, who is therefore compelled to ply his trade in 
the open air, where it is interrupted by every vicissitude of 
the weather." 1 It is only the special skill accumulated from 
generation to generation, and transmitted from father to son, 
that gives to the Hindoo, as it does to the spider, this pro- 
ficiency. And yet the work of such a Hindoo weaver is very 
complicated, compared with that of a manufacturing labourer. 

An artificer, who performs one after another the various 
fractional operations in the production of a finished article, 
must at one time change his place, at another his tools. The 
transition from one operation to another interrupts the flow 
of his labour, and creates, so to say, gaps in his working day. 
These gaps close up so soon as he is tied to one and the same 
operation all day long ; they vanish in proportion as the 
changes in his work diminish. The resulting increased pro- 
ductive power is owing either to an increased expenditure 
of labour-power in a given time — i.e., to increased intensity 
of labour — or to a decrease in the amount of labour-power un- 
p^oductively consumed. The extra expenditure of power, 
demanded by every transition from rest to motion, is made up 
for by prolonging the duration of the normal velocity when 
once acquired. On the other hand, constant labour of one 
uniform kind disturbs the intensity and flow of a man's animal 
spirits, which find recreation and delight in mere change of 
activity. 

The productiveness of labour depends not only on the pro- 
ficiency of the workman, but on the perfection of his tools. 
Tools of the same kind, such as knives, drills, gimlets, ham- 
mers, &c., may be employed in different processes ; and the 

1 Historical and descriptive account of Brit. India, &c. ,by Hugh Murray and James 
Wilson, &c, Edinburgh 1832. v. IX p. 449. The Indian loom is upright, i.e., the 
Wttrp is stretched vertically. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. ^^ 

same tool may serve various purposes in a single process. But 
so soon as the different operations of a labour-process are dis- 
connected the one from the other, and each fractional operation 
acquires in the hands of the detail labourer a suitable and 
peculiar form, alterations become necessary in the implements 
that previously served more than one purpose. The direction 
taken by this change is determined by the difficulties ex- 
perienced in consequence of the unchanged form of the imple- 
ment. Manufacture is characterized by the differentiation of 
the instruments of labour — a differentiation whereby imple- 
ments of a given sort acquire fixed shapes, adapted to each 
particular application, and by the specialisation of those in- 
struments, giving to each special implement its full play only 
in the hands of a specific detail labourer. In Birmingham 
alone 500 varieties of hammers are produced, and not only is 
each adapted to one particular process, but several varisties 
often serve exclusively for the different operations in one and 
the same process. The manufacturing period simplifies, im- 
proves, and multiplies the implements of labour, by adapting 
them to the exclusively special functions of each detail la- 
bourer. 1 It thus creates at the same time one of the material 
conditions for the existence of machinery, which consists of a 
combination of simple instruments. 

The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest 
elements of manufacture. Let us now turn to its aspect as a 
whole. 

SECTION :'». ill i: two FUNDAMENTAL FORMA Of HANI ELI : 

BETEEOOENEOU8 ftfANUFAOTl BE, BEEIA1 M \ M I \< M BE. 

The organisation of manufacture has two fundamental torn 
which, in spile of occasional blending, are essentially different 

1 Darwin in bis spoon making work on the origin <>f ipeeies, remark*, with n f- 1 
bo the natural organs of plants and animal-, " Bo long as ono and the lame i 
different kindi of work to perform, a ground foi Lti ohangeabilitj o J : y l "' 

found in this, that natural selection preserves 01 rap] :: *ariatia 

form Iom oarefull j than if that organ were destined (or one ipeeial pnrp< 
Thus, knives that arc adapted to cut all sorts of things, may. on ths irholi . be ol 
ihape; but an Implement destined to l>o us. .1 raj 

• n! ihape foi cvi'iy different u 



334 Capitalist Production. 

in kind, and, moreover, play very distinct parts in the sub- 
sequent transformation of manufacture into modern industry 
carried on by machinery. This double character arises from 
the nature of the article produced. This article either results 
from the mere mechanical fitting together of partial products 
made independently, or owes its completed shape to a series of 
connected processes and manipulations. 

A locomotive, for instance, consists of more than 5000 inde- 
pendent parts. It cannot, however, serve as an example of 
the first kind of genuine manufacture, for it is a structure 
produced by modern mechanical industry. But a watch can ; 
and William Petty used it to illustrate the division of labour 
in manufacture. Formerly the individual work of a Nurem- 
berg artificer, the watch has been transformed into the social 
product of an immense number of detail labourers, such as 
mainspring makers, dial makers, spiral spring makers, jewelled 
hole makers, ruby lever makers, hand makers, case makers, 
screw makers, gilders, with numerous sub-divisions, such as 
wheel makers (brass and steel separate), pin makers, movement 
makers, acheveur de pignon (fixes the wheels on the axles, 
polishes the facets, &c.), pivot makers, planteur de finissage 
(puts the wheels and springs in the works), finisseur de barillet 
(cuts teeth in the wheels, makes the holes of the right size, 
&c), escapement makers, cylinder makers for cylinder escape- 
ments, escapement wheel makers, balance wheel makers, ra- 
quette makers (apparatus for regulating the watch), the 
planteur d'echappement (escapement maker proper) ; then the 
repasseur de barillet (finishes the box for the spring, &c.) } 
steel polishers, wheel polishers, screw polishers, figure painters, 
dial enamellers (melt the enamel on the copper), fabricant de 
pendants (makes the ring by which the case is hung), finisseur 
de chai niere (puts the brass hinge in the cover, &c), faiseur de 
secret (puts in the springs that open the case), graveur, ciseleur 
polisseur de boite, &c, &c, and last of all the repasseur, who 
iits together the whole watch and hands it over in a going 
state. Only a few parts of the watch pass through several 
hands; and all these membra disjecta come together for the 
first time in the hand that binds them into one mechanical 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 335 

whole. This external relation between the finished product, 
and its various and diverse elements makes it, as well in this 
case as in the case of all similar finished articles, a matter of 
chance whether the detail labourers are brought together in 
one workshop or not. The detail operations may further be 
carried on like so many independent handicrafts, as they arc 
in the Cantons of Vaud and Neufchatel ; while in Geneva there 
exist large watch manufactories where the detail labourers 
directly co-operate under the control of a single capitalist. 
And even in the latter case the dial, the springs, and the case, 
are seldom made in the factory itself. To carry on the trade 
as a manufacture, with concentration of workmen, is, in the 
watch trade, profitable only under exceptional conditions, be- 
cause competition is greater between the labourers who desiro 
to work at home, and because the splitting up of the work 
into a number of heterogeneous processes, permits but little 
use of the instruments of labour in common, and the capitalist, 
by scattering the work, saves the outlay on workshops, &c.' 
Nevertheless the position of this detail labourer who, though 
he works at home, does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, 
etablisseur), is very different from that of the independent 
artificer, who works for his own customers. 2 

The second kind of manufacture, its perfected form, pro- 
duces articles that go through connected phases of develop- 

1 In the year 1854 Geneva produced 80,000 watches, which is not one-fifth of the 
production in the Canton of Neufchatel. La Chaux-de-Fond alone, which we may 
look upon as a huge watch manufactory, produces yearly twice as many as Genera. 
Prom ls:>0-Gl Geneva produced 750,000 watches. See "Report from Geneva on the 
Watch Trade" in "Reports hy H. M.'s Secretaries of Embassy and Legation <>n the 
Manufactures, Commerce, <fcc, No. G, 18G3." The want of connexion alone, between 
th- processes into which the production of articles that merely consist of put* fitted 
together is split up, makes it very difficult to convert such a manufacture into a 
blanch of modern industry carried on by machinery ; but in the case of a watch thill 

are two othei impediment! In addition, the minuteness and delicacy of its parte, and 

its character as an article of luxury. Hence their variety, whieh is moh, that in the 

ix'nt London housei icaroely a doaen watch* i ere made alike in th< 

The watch manufactory of Messrs. Vaoheron k Oonetantin, in which maohinerj 

been employed with luooeee, produces at the most three or four different i • 

nize and form. 

'In watchmaking, that classical example of heterogeneous nianufactui. . Wi 

itudy with great accuracy tin- above mentioned differentiation and .-; 

the instrument! of labour caused by the sub division of handicraft*. 



3 3 6 Capitalist Production. 

ment, through a series of processes step by step, like the wire 
in the manufacture of needles, which passes through the hands 
of 72 and sometimes even 92 different detail workmen. 

In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, com- 
bines scattered handicrafts, it lessens the space by which the 
various phases of production are separated from each other. 
The time taken in passing from one stage to another is 
shortened, so is the labour that effectuates this passage. 1 In 
comparison with a handicraft, productive power is gained, and 
this gain is owing to the general co-operative character of 
manufacture. On the other hand, division of labour, which is 
the distinguishing principle of manufacture, requires the isola- 
tion of the various stages of production and their independ- 
ence of each other. The establishment and maintenance of a 
connexion between the isolated functions necessitates the in- 
cessant transport of the article from one hand to another, and 
from one process to another. From the standpoint of modern 
mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth as a character- 
istic and costly disadvantage, and one that is immanent in the 
principle of manufacture. 2 

If we confine our attention to some particular lot of raw 
materials, of rags, for instance, in paper manufacture, or of 
wire in needle manufacture, we perceive that it passes in 
succession through a series of stages in the hands of the 
various detail workmen until completion. On the other hand, 
if we look at the workshop as a whole, we see the raw material 
in all the stages of its production at the same time. The col- 
lective labourer, with one set of his many hands armed with 
one kind of tools, draws the wire, with another set, armed 
with different tools, he, at the same time, straightens it, with 
another, he cuts it, with another, points it, and so on. The 
different detail processes, which were successive in time, have 
become simultaneous, go on side by side in space. Hence, 

1 " In so close a cohabitation of the people, the carriage must needs be less." (" The 
Advantages of the East India Trade," p. 106.) 

2 "The isolation of the different stages of manufacture, consequent upon the em- 
ployment of manual labour, adils immensely to the cost of production, the loss 
mainly arising from the mere removals from one process to another." (" The Industry 
of Nations." Loud., 1855. Part II., p. 200.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture, 337 

production of a greater quantum of finished commodities in a 
given time. 1 This simultaneity, it is true, is due to the 
general co-operative form of the process as a whole ; but 
Manufacture not only finds the conditions for co-operation 
ready to hand, it also, to some extent, creates them by the 
sub-division of handicraft labour. On the other hand, it 
accomplishes this social organisation of the labour-process only 
by riveting each labourer to a single fractional detail. 

Since the fractional product of each detail labourer is, at the 
same time, only a particular stage in the development of one 
and the same finished article, each labourer, or each group of 
labourers, prepares the raw material for another labourer or 
group. The result of the labour of the one is the starting 
point for the libour of the other. The one workman therefore 
gives occupation directly to the other. The labour-time 
necessary in each partial process, for attaining the desired 
effect, is learnt by experience ; and the mechanism of Manu- 
facture, as a whole, is based on the assumption that a given 
result will be obtained in a given time. It is only on this 
assumption that the various supplementary labour-processes 
can proceed uninterruptedly, simultaneously, and side by side. 
It is clear that this direct dependence of the operations, and 
therefore of the labourers, on each other, c6mpels each one of 
them to spend on his work no more than the necessary time, 
and thus a continuity, uniformity, regularity, order, 2 and even 
intensity of labour, of quite a different kind, is begotten than 
is to be found in an independent handicraft or even in simple 
co-operation. The rule, that the labour-time expended on ■ 
commodity should not exceed that which is socially accessary 
for its production, appears, in the production of commodities 
generally, to be established by the mere elfect of competition ; 

1 "It (the division of labour) produces also an economy of time by separating the 
work into its different brandies, all of whicb m;iy bo carried on into execution at tln< 
Bame moment. . . By cirrying on all the different processes at once, which an in 
dividual must bavc executed separately, it becomes possible to produce a multitude 
of pins completely fmisbed in tbe same time as a singlo pin might have been I Ithl I 
cut or pointed." (Dugald Stewart, 1. c, p. 319.) 

9 "The. more variety of artists to every manufacture . . . tbo greater the <• 
and regularity of every work, the same must needs bo done iu less time-, the la 
must be less." ( M The Advantages," ic, p. G3.\ 

Y 



338 Capitalist Production. 

since, to express ourselves superficially, each single producer 
is obliged to sell bis commodity at its market price. Jn 
Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning out of a given 
quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of the 
process of production itself. 1 

Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield 
therefore, in equal times unequal quantities of fractional pro- 
ducts. If, therefore, the same labourer has, day after day, to 
perform the same operation, there must be a different number 
of labourers for each operation ; for instance, in type manufac- 
ture, there are four founders and two breakers to one rubber : 
the founder casts 2,000 type an hour, the breaker breaks up 
4,000, and the rubber polishes 8,000. Here we have again the 
principle of co-operation in its simplest form, the simultaneous 
employment of many doing the same thing ; only now, this 
principle is the expression of an organic relation. The division 
of labour, as carried out in Manufacture, not only simplifies and 
multiplies the qualitatively different parts of the social collec- 
tive labourer, but also creates a fixed mathematical relation or 
ratio which regulates the quantitative extent of those parts — 
i.e., the relative number of labourers, or the relative size of the 
group of labourers, for each detail operation. It developes, 
along with the qualitative sub-division of the social labour 
process, a quantitative rule and proportionality for that 
process. 

When once the most fitting proportion has been experi- 
mentally established for the numbers of the detail labourers in 
the various groups when producing on a given scale, that scale 
can be extended only by employing a multiple of each particu- 
lar group. 2 There is this to boot, that the same individual can 

1 Nevertheless, the manufacturing system, in many branches of industry, attains 
this result but very imperfectly, because it knows not how to control with certainty 
the general chemical and physical conditions of the process of production. 

* " When (from the peculiar nature of the produce of each manufactory), the num- 
ber of processes into which it is most advantageous to divide it is ascertained, as well 
sis the number of individuals to be employed, then all other manufactories which do 
not employ a direct multiple of this number will produce the article at a greater cost. 
. . . Hence arises one of the causes of the great size of manufacturing establish- 
ments." (C. Babbage. "On the Economy of Machinery," 1st ed. London, 1832. 
Ch. xxi., p. 172-173 ) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 339 

do certain kinds of work just as well on a large as on a small 
scale ; for instance, the labour of superintendence, the carriage 
of the fractional product from one stage to the next, &c. The 
isolation of such functions, their allotment to a particular 
labourer, does not become advantageous till after an increase in 
the number of labourers employed ; but this increase must 
affect every group proportionally. 

The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular 
detail function is assigned, is made up of homogeneous ele- 
ments, and is one of the constituent parts of the total 
mechanism. In many manufactures, however, the group itself 
is an organised body of labour, the total mechanism being a 
repetition or multiplication of these elementary organisms. 
Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass bottles. It may 
be resolved into three essentially different stages. First, the 
preliminary stage, consisting of the preparation of the com- 
ponents of the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &c, and melting 
them into a fluid mass of alass. 1 Various detail labourers are 
erupted in this first stage, as also in the final one of removing 
the bottles from the drying furnace, sorting and packing them, 
&c. In the middle, between these two stages, comes the glass 
melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid mass. At each 
mouth of the furnace, there works a group, called "the hole," 
consisting of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower, one 
gatherer, one putter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in. These 
live detail workers are so many special organs of a bingle 
working organism that acts only as a whole, and therefore tan 
operate only by the direct co-operation of the whole five. The 
whole body is paralysed if but one of its members be wanting. 
But a glass furnace has several openings (in England from 4 to 
6), each of which contains an earthenware melting-pot full oi 
molten glass, and employs a similar five-membered group ol 
workers. The organisation of each group is based on division 
of labour, but the bond between the different groups Lb simple 
co-operation, which, by using in common one of the means ol 

1 In England, the melting furnace is distinct from the glasn furmu. [n vhfol 
glaHB is manipulated. In Belgium, one and the MOM ftUM* 

prOCCHSCB. 



3-j.o Capitalist Production. 

production, the furnace, causes it to be more economically con- 
sumed. Such a furnace, with its 4-G groups, constitutes a 
glass house ; and a glass manufactory comprises a number of 
such glass houses, together with the apparatus and workmen 
requisite for the preparatory and final stages. 

Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combina- 
tion of various handicrafts, so, too, it developes into a combina- 
tion of various manufactures. The larger English glass 
manufacturers, for instance, make their own earthenware 
melting-pots, because, on the quality of these depends, to a 
great extent, the success or failure of the process. The manu- 
facture of one of the means of production is here united with 
that of the product. On the other hand, the manufacture of 
the product may be united with other manufactures, of which 
that product is the raw material, or with the products of which 
it is itself subsequently mixeJ. Thus, we find the manufacture 
of flint glass combined with that of glass cutting and brass 
founding • the latter for the metal settings of various articles 
of glass. The various manufactures so combined form more or 
less separate departments of a larger manufacture, but are at 
the same time independent processes, each with its own 
division of labour. In spite of the many advantages offered by 
this combination of manufactures, it never grows into a complete 
technical system on its own foundation. That happens only 
on its transformation into an industry carried on by machinery. 

Early in the manufacturing period, the principle of lessening 
the necessary labour-time in the production of commodities, 1 
was accepted and formulated : and the use of machines, especi- 
ally for certain simple first processes that have to be conducted 
on a very large scale, and with the application of great force, 
sprang up here and there. Thus, at an early period in paper 
manufacture, the tearing up of the rags was done by paper- 
mills; and in metal works, the pounding of the ores wa.s 
effected by stamping mills. 8 The Roman Empire had handed 

1 This can be seen from W. Petty, John Bellers, Andrew Yarranton, "The Ad- 
vantages of the East India Trade," and J. Vanderlint, not to mention others. 

2 Towards the end of the 16th century, mortars and sieves were still used in Franca 
for pounding and washing ores. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 34 1 

down the elementary form of all machinery in the water- 
wheel. 1 

The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions 
of the compass, of gunpowder, of type-printing, and of the 
automatic clock. But, on the whole, machinery played that 
subordinate part which Adam Smith assigns to it in compari- 
son with division of labour. 2 The sporadic use of machinery 
in the 17th century was of the greatest importance, because it 
supplied the great mathematicians of that time with a practical 
basis and stimulant to the creation of the science of mechanics. 

The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a 
number of detail labourers, is the machinery specially char- 
acteristic of the manufacturing period. The various operations 
that are performed in turns by the producer of a commodity, 
and coalesce one with another during the progress of produc- 
tion, lay claim to him in various ways. In one operation he 
must exert more strength, in another more skill, in another 
more attention ; and the same individual does not possess all 
these qualities in an equal degree. After Manufacture has 
once separated, made independent, and isolated the various 
operations, the labourers are divided, classified, and grouped 
according to their predominating qualities. If their natural 
endowments are, on the one hand, the foundation on which 
the division of labour is built up, on the other hand, Manu- 
facture, once introduced, developes in them new powers that 
are by nature fitted only for limited and special function* 
The collective labourer now possesses, in an equal degree of 

1 The whole history of the development of machinery can be traced in the lib' 
of the corn mill. The factory in England is still a " mill." In German teohnok 
works of the first decade of this century, the term " miihlc " is still found in use, net 
only for all machinery driven by the forces of Nature, but also for all manufaetu, 
where apparattu in the nature of machinery is applied. 

■ As will be seen more in detail in the fourth book of this work, Adam Smith hai 
not established a single new proposition relating to division of labour. What, how 
ever, characterises him as the political economist jtar exoellenoc of {},■■ period of 
Manufacture, is the stress he lays on division of labour. The subordinate part which 
he assigns to machinery gave occasion in the early days ot modem moohanioal ifl 
dustry to the polemic of Lauderdal*-, and, at a later period, to that <'f I'i< \. Smith 
ulso confounds differentiation of the instruments of labour, in which the .: 

labourers themselvei took an actjvc part, with the Invention of machinery : i' 
hitter, it is not the workmen in manofactoriee, tnt learned men, bandieraftai 

and even peasants (IJrindiey), who pby «'» parti 



342 Capitalist Production. 

excellence, all tbe qualities requisite for production, and ex- 
pends them in the most economical manner, by exclusively 
employing all his organs, consisting of particular labourers, or 
groups of labourers, in performing their special functions. 1 
The one-sidedness and the deficiencies of the detail labourer 
become perfections when he is a part of the collective labourer.* 
The habit of doing only one thing converts him into a never 
failing instrument, while his connexion with the whole me- 
chanism compels him to work with the regularity of the parts 
of a machine. 3 

Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and 
complex, both high and low, his members, the individual 
labour-powers, require different degrees of training, and must 
therefore have different values. Manufacture, therefore, de- 
velopes a hierarchy of labour-powers, to which there corres- 
ponds a scale of wages. ]f, on the one hand, the individual 
labourers are appropriated and annexed for life by a limited 
function ; on the other hand, the various operations of the 
hierarchy are parcelled out among the labourers according to 
both their natural and their acquired capabilities. 4 Every 
process of production, however, requires certain simple manip- 

1 "The master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be executed into different 
processes, each requiring different degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly 
that precise quantity of both which is necessary for each process ; whereas, if the 
whole work were executed by one workman, that person must possess sufficient skill 
to perform the most difficult, and sufficient strength to execute the most laborious of 
the operations into which the article is divided." (Ch. Babbage. 1. c, ch. xviii.) 

2 For instance, abnormal development of some muscles, curvature of bones, &c. 

3 The question put by one of the Inquiry Commissioners, How the young persons 
are kept steadily to their work, is very correctly answered by Mr. Wm. Marshall, the 
general manager of a glass manufactory : " They cannot well neglect their work ; 
when they once begin, they must go on ; they are ju-t the same as parts of a 
machine." ( "Children's Empl. Comm.," 4th Rep., 1865, p. 247.) 

4 Dr. Ure, in his apotheosis of Modern Mechanical Industry, brings out the peculiar 
ciiaracter of manufacture more sharply than previous economists, who had not his pole- 
mical interest in the matter, and more sharply even than his contemporaries — Babbage, 
e.g., who, though much his superior as a mathematician and mechanician, treated me- 
chanical industry from the standpoint of manufacture alone. Ure says, " This appro- 
priation . . . to each, a workman of appropriate value and cost was naturally assigned, 
forms the very essence of division of labour." On the other hand, he describes this 
division as "adaptation of labour to the different talents of men," and lastly, charac- 
terises the whole manufacturing system as " a system for the division or gradation of 
labour," as "the division of labour into degrees of skill, " kc. (Ure, 1. c. pp. 19-23 
passim.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 343 

ulations, which every man is capable of doing. They too 
are now severed from their connexion with the more preg- 
nant moments of activity, and ossified into exclusive func- 
tions of specially appointed labourers. Hence, Manufacture 
begets, in every handicraft that it seizes upon, a class of so- 
called unskilled labourers, a class which handicraft industry 
strictly excluded. If it developes a one-sided speciality into a 
perfection, at the expense of the whole of a man's working 
capacity, it also begins to make a speciality of the absence of 
all development. Alongside of the hierarchic gradation there 
steps the simple separation of the labourers into skilled and 
unskilled. For the latter, the cost of apprenticeship vanishes ; 
for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of artificers, 
in consequence of the functions being simplified. In both 
cases the value of labour-power falls. 1 An exception to this 
law holds good whenever the decomposition of the labour- 
process begets new and comprehensive functions, that either 
had no place at all, or only a very modest one, in handicrafts. 
The fall in the value of labour-power, caused by the disap- 
pearance or diminution of the expenses of apprenticeship, im- 
plies a direct increase of surplus-value for the benefit of 
capital ; for everything that shortens the necessary labour- 
time required for the reproduction of labour-power, extends the 
domain of surplus-labour. 

■MOTION 4. — DIVISION OF LABOUR Ilf MANUFACTURE, AND DIVISION OK 

LABOUR IN SOCIETY. 

We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its 
simple elements, then the detail labourer and his implements, 
and finally, the totality of the mechanism. We shall now 
lightly touch upon the relation between the division of labour 
in manufacture, and the social division of labour, which form* 
the foundation of all production of commodities. 

If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate fcbe 
separation of social production into its main division! or 
ijencra — viz., agriculture;, industries, &C., as division of labour 

1 M BftOfa li.mdicraftHman bting . . . enabled to p.rfert hium-lf I > 
point, became . . a cheaper workman." (I're, 1. c, p. L9.) 



344 Capitalist Production. 

in general, and the splitting up of these families into species 
and sub-species, as division of labour in particular, and the 
division of labour within the workshop as division of labour in 
singular or in detail. 1 

Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying 
down of individuals to a particular calling, developes itself, 
just as does the division of labour in manufacture, from opposite 
starting points. Within a family, 2 and after further develop- 
ment within a tribe, there springs up naturally a division of 
labour, caused by differences of sex and age, a division that is 
consequently based on a purely physiological foundation, which 
division enlarges its materials by the expansion of the com- 
munity, by the increase of population, and more especially, by 
the conflicts between different tribes, and the subjugation of 
one tribe by another. On the other hand, as I have before 
remarked, the exchange of products springs up at the points 
where different families, tribes, communities, come in contact ; 
for, in the beginning of civilisation, it is not private indi- 
viduals but families, tribes, &c, that meet on an independent 
footing. Different communities find different means of pro- 
duction, and different means of subsistence in their natural en- 
vironment. Hence, their modes of production, and of living, 
and their products are different. It is this spontaneously de- 
veloped difference which, when different communities come in 
contact, calls forth the mutual exchange of products, and the 

1 " Division of labour proceeds from the separation of professions the most widely 
different to that division, where several labourers divide between them the preparation 
of one and the same product, as in manufacture." ( S torch : " Cours d'Econ. Pol. 
Paris Edn." t. I., p. 173.) " Nous rencontrons chez les peuples parvenus a un certain 
degre de civilisation trois genres de divisions d'industrie : la premiere, que nous 
nommerons generale, amene la distinction des producteurs en agriculteurs, manu- 
facturiers et commercans, elle se rapporte aux trois principales branches d'industrie 
nationale ; la seconde, qu'on pourrait appeler speciale, est la division de chaque genre 
d'industrie en especes. ... la troisieme division d'industrie, celle enfin qu'on devrait 
qualifier de division de la besogne ou de travail proprement dit, est celle qui s'etablit 
dans les arts et les metiers separes. . . . qui s'etablit dans la plupart des manufactures 
et des ateliers." (Skarbek. 1. c. pp. 84, 85.) 

2 Note to the third edition. Subsequent very searching study of the primitive 
condition of man, led the author to the conclusion, that it was not the family that 
originally developed into the tribe, but that, on the contrary, the tribe was the primi- 
tive and spontaneously developed form of human association, on the basis of blood 
relationship, and that out of the first incipient loosening of the tribal bonds, the 
many and various forms of the family were afterwards developed. (Ed. 3rd ed.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 345 

consequent gradual conversion of those products into com- 
modities. Exchange does not create the differences between 
the spheres of production, but brings what are already different 
into relation, and thus converts them into more or less inter- 
dependent branches of the collective production of an enlarged 
society. In the latter case, the social division of labour arises 
from the exchange between spheres of production, that are 
originally distinct and independent of one another. In the 
former, where the physiological division of labour is the starting 
point, the particular organs of a compact whole grow loose, 
and break off, principally owing to the exchange of commodi- 
ties with foreign communities, and then isolate themselves so 
far, that the sole bond, still connecting the various kinds of 
work, is the exchange of the products as commodities. In the 
one case, it is the making dependent what was before inde- 
pendent ; in the other case, the making independent what was 
before dependent. 

The foundation of every division of labour that is well de- 
veloped, and brought about by the exchange of commodities, is 
the separation between town and country. 1 It may be said, 
that the whole economical history of societ}' is summed up in 
the movement of this antithesis. We pass it over, however, 
for the present. 

Just as a certain number of simultaneously employed 
labourers are the material pre-requisites for division of labour 
in manufacture, so are the number and density of the popula- 
tion, which here correspond to the agglomeration in one 
workshop, a necessary condition for the division of labour 
in society. 2 Nevertheless, this density is more or Less relative, 

1 Sir James ftteuart is the economist who has handled this subject baft, Hou 
little his book, which appeared ten years before the " Wealth of Nations," is known. 
•Van at the present time, may be Judged from the fact that the admirers of Malthu* 
do not even know that the hist edition of the lattcr's work on population coi.t 
BVOept in tin' pnrelj declamatory part, very little but extracts from Stcuart, and in 

a less degree, from Wallace and Towneend. 

■ "There is i« certain density of population which is convenient, both fof I 
intercourse, ;uid for that combination of powers by which the produce of labOOT i* 
increased." (.lumen Mill, 1. c. p. f>0.) ** As the number of labourers increase 
productive power of society augments in the compound ratio of that n ftUltl 

plied by the effects of the division of labour." ('lb. Hod-skin, 1. c. p; 



34-6 Capitalist Production. 

A relatively thinly populated country, with well-developed 
means of communication, has a denser population than a more 
numerously populated country, with badly-developed means of 
communication ; and in this sense the Northern States of the 
American Union, for instance, are more thickly populated than 
India. 1 

Since the production and the circulation of commodities are 
the general pre-requisites of the capitalist mode of production, 
division of labour in manufacture demands, that division of 
labour in society at large should previously have attained 
a certain degree of development. Inversely, the former 
division reacts upon and developes and multiplies the 
latter. Simultaneously, with the differentiation of the in- 
struments of labour, the industries that produce these in- 
struments, become more and more differentiated. 2 If the 
manufacturing system seize upon an industry, which, pre- 
viously, was carried on in connexion with others, either as a 
chief or as a subordinate industry, and by one producer, these 
industries immediately separate their connexion, and become 
independent. If it seize upon a particular stage in the pro- 
duction of a commodity, the other stages of its production 
become converted into so many independent industries. It 
has already been stated, that where the finished article con- 
sists merely of a number of parts fitted together, the detail 
operations may re-establish themselves as genuine and sep- 
arate handicrafts. In order to carry out more perfectly the 
division of labour in manufacture, a single branch of pro- 
duction is, according to the varieties of its raw material, or the 
various forms that one and the same raw material may assume, 
split up into numerous, and to some extent, entirely new 
manufactures. Accordingly, in France alone, in the first half 
of the 18th century, over 100 different kinds of silk stuffs 

1 In consequence of the great demand for cotton after 1861, the production of 
cotton, in some thickly populated districts of India, was extended at the expense of 
rice cultivation. In consequence there arose local famins, the defective means of 
communication not permitting the failure of rice in one district to be compensated 
by importation from another. 

2 Thus the fabrication of shuttles formed, as early as the 17th century, a special 
bianch of industry in Holland. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 347 

were woven, and in Avignon, it was law, that " every appren- 
tice should devote himself to only one sort of fabrication, and 
should not learn the preparation of several kinds of stuff at 
once." The territorial division of labour, which confines 
special branches of production to special districts of a country, 
acquires fresh stimulus from the manufacturing system, which 
exploits every special advantage. 1 The Colonial system and 
the opening out of the markets of the world, both of which 
are included in the general conditions of existence of the 
manufacturing period, furnish rich material for developing 
the division of labour in society. It is not the place, here, to go 
on to show how division of labour seizes upon, not only the 
economical, but every other sphere of society, and everywhere 
lays the foundation of that all engrossing system of specialis- 
ing and sorting men, that development in a man of one single 
faculty at the expense of all other faculties, which caused A. 
Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: " We make 
a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens." 2 

But, in spite of the numberous analogies and links connecting 
them, division of labour in the interior of a society, and that 
in the interior of a workshop, differ not only in degree, but 
also in kind. The analogy appears most indisputable where 
there is an invisible bond uniting the various branches of 
trade. For instance the cattle breeder produces hides, the 
tanner makes the hides into leather, and the shoemaker, the 
leather into boots. Here the thing produced by each of them 
is but a step towards the final form, which is the product of 
all their labours combined. There are, besides, all the various 
industries that supply the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the 
shoemaker with the means of production. Now it is quite 
possible to imagine, with Adam Smith, that the difference be 
tween the above social division of labour, and th<> division in 

1 " Whether the woollen manufacture of England is not divided into several pnrt* 
or branches appropriated to particular places, whero they art) only or principally 
manufacture d ; fine clotlm in Somersetshire, coarse in Yorkshire, lung ells 
soics at Sudbury, crapes at Norwich, linseys at Kendal, blankets at Win: 
so forth." (lierkeley : u The Querist," 1780, p 580.) 

1 A Ferguson: "History of Civil Society." Edinburgh, 1707 , I'art i% Met u, 
p. 286, 



348 Capitalist Production. 

manufacture, is merely subjective, exists -merely for the 
observer, who, in a manufacture, can see with one glance, all 
the numerous operations being performed on one spot, while 
in the instance given above, the spreading out of the work 
over great areas, and the gieat number of people employed in 
each brancli of labour, obscure the connexion. 1 But what is 
it that forms the bond between the independent labours of 
the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker ? It is the 
fact that their respective products are commodities. What, on 
tae other hand, characterises division of labour in manufactures? 
The fact that the detail labourer produces no commodities. 2 
It is only the common product of all the detail labourers that 
becomes a commodity. 3 Division of labour in a society is 
brought about by the purchase and sale of the products of 
different branches of industry, while the connexion between 

1 In manufacture proper, he says, the division of labour appears to be greater, 
because " those employed in every different branch of the work can often be col- 
lected into the same workhouse, and placed at once under the view of the spectator. 
In those great manufactures, (!) on the contrary, which are destined to supply the 
great wants of the great body of the people, every different branch of the work 
employs so great a number of workmen, that it is impossible to collect them all into 
the same workhouse . . . the division is not near so obvious." (A.Smith: "Wealth 
of Nations, " bk. i. ch. i. ) The celebrated passage in the same chapter that begins with 
the words, ' ' Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day labourer 
in a civilized and thriving country, "&c. , and then proceeds to depict what an enormous 
number and variety of industries contribute to the satisfaction of the wants of an 
ordinary labourer, is copied almost word for word from B. de Mandeville's Kemarks 
to his "Fable of the Bees, or Private Vices, Publick Benefits." (First ed., without 
the remarks, 1706; with the remarks, 1714.) 

2 "There is no longer anything which we can call the natural reward of individual 
labour. Each labourer produces only some part of a whole, and each part, having no 
value or utility in itself, there is nothing on which the labourer can seize, and say : 
It is my product, this I will keep to myself." ( " Labour Defended against the Claims 
of Capital." Lond., 1825, p. 25.) The author of this admirable work is the Th. 
Hodgskin I have already cited. 

3 This distinction between division of labour in society and in manufacture, was 
practically illustrated to the Yankees. One of the new taxes devised at Washington 
during the civil war, was the duty of 6% "on all industrial products." Question: 
What is an industrial product? Answer of the legislature: A thing is produced 
" when it is made," and it is made when it is ready for sale. Now, for one example 
out of many. The New York and Philadelphia manufacturers had previously been 
in the habit of "making" umbrellas, with all their belongings. But since an 
umbrella is a mixtam compositum of very heterogeneous parts, by degrees these 
parts became the products of various separate industries, carried on independently 
in different places. They entered as separate commodities into the umbrella man- 
ufactory, where they were fitted together. The Yankees have given to articles thus 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 349 

the detail operations in a workshop, are due to the sale of the 
labour-power of several workmen to one capitalist, who applies 
it as combined labour-power. The division of labour in the 
workshop implies concentration of the means of production in 
the hands of one capitalist ; the division of labour in society 
implies their dispersion among many independent producers of 
commodities. While within the workshop, the iron law of 
proportionality subjects definite numbers of workmen to de- 
finite functions, in the society outside the workshop, chance and 
caprice have full play in distributing the producers and their 
means of production among the various branches of industry. 
The different spheres of production, it is true, constantly tend 
to an equilibrium: for, on the one hand, while each producer 
of a commodity is bound to produce a use-value, to satisfy a 
particular social want, and while the extent of these wants 
differs quantitatively, still there exists an inner relation which 
settles their proportions into a regular system, and that system 
one of spontaneous growth ; and, on the other hand, the law of 
the value of commodities ultimately determines how much of 
its disposable working- time society can expend on each par- 
ticular class of commodities. But this constant tendency to 
equilibrium, of the various spheres of production, is exercised, 
only in the shape of a reaction against the constant upset 
ting of this equilibrium. The a 'priori system on which the 
division of labour, within the workshop, is regularly carried 
out, becomes in the division of labour within the society, an a 
posteriori, nature-imposed necessit} r , controlling the lawless 
caprice of the producers, and perceptible in the barometrical 
fluctuations of the market prices. Division of labour within 
the workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capital- 
ist over men, that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs 
to him. The division of labour within the society brings into 
contact independent commodity-producers, who acknowli 
no other authority but that of competition, of the COerci Hi 
exerted by the pressure of their mutual interests ; jus< as in the 

fitted together, the name of "assi mhle<l articles," a luiim- t lit v '• « rvr, for b.-n : 

an aeeemblage of taxes. Thm the umbrella "aeeomblea,' 1 '" ' ' ■ t! "* I'"' 
each of its element*, and 1 fui that •>'. , an it« own total pi 



35° Capitalist Production. 

animal kingdom, the helium omnium contra omnes more or less 
preserves the conditions of existence of every species. The 
same bourgeois mind which praises division of labour in the 
workshop, life-long annexation of the labourer to a partial 
operation, and his complete subjection to capital, as being an 
organisation of labour that increases its productiveness — that- 
same bourgeois mind denounces with equal vigour every con- 
scious attempt to socially control and regulate the process of 
production, as an inroad upon such sacred things as the rights 
of property, freedom and unrestricted play for the bent of 
the individual capitalist. It is very characteristic that the 
enthusiastic apologists of the factory system have nothing 
more damning to urge against a general organization of the 
labour of society, than that it would turn all society into one 
immense factory. 

If, in a society with capitalist production, anarchy in the 
social division of labour and despotism in that of the workshop 
are mutual conditions the one of the other, we find, on the con- 
trary, in those earlier forms of society in which the separation 
of trades has been spontaneously developed, then crystallized, 
and finally made permanent by law, on the one hand, a speci- 
men of the organisation of the labour of society, in accordance 
with an approved and authoritative plan, and on the other, 
the entire exclusion of division of labour in the workshop, 
or at all events a mere dwarf-like or sporadic and accidental 
development of the same. 1 

Those small and extremely ancient Indian communities, some 
of which have continued down to this day, are based on posses- 
sion in common of the land, on the blending of agriculture and 
handicrafts, and on an unalterable division of labour, which 
serves, whenever a new community is started, as a plan and 
scheme ready cut and dried. Occupying areas of from 100 up 
to several thousand acres, each forms a compact whole pro- 
ducing all it repuires. The chief part of the products is 

1 " On peut . . eta'jlir en regie generale, que moins l'autorite preside a la division 
du travail dans l'interieur de la societe, plus la division du travail se developpe dan6 
l'interieur de l'atelier, et plus elle y est soumise a l'autorite d'un seul. Ainsi 
1'auLoiitc dans 1 "atelier et celle dans la societe, par rapport a la division du travail, 
nout en raison inverse Tune de l'autre." (Karl Marx, " Misere,"' &c. , pp. 130-131.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 35 1 

destined for direct use by the community itself, and does not 
take the form of a commodity. Hence, production here is 
independent of that division of labour brought about, in Indian 
society as a whole, by means of the exchange of commodities. 
It is the surplus alone that becomes a commodity, and a portion 
of even that, not until it has reached the hands of the State, 
into whose hands from time immemorial a certain quantity of 
these products has found its way in the shape of rent in kind. 
The constitution of these communities varies in different parts 
of India. In those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in 
common, and the produce divided among the members. At 
the same time, spinning and weaving are carried on in each 
family as subsidiary industries. Side by side with the masses 
thus occupied with one and the same work, we find the " chief 
inhabitant," who is judge, police, and tax-gatherer in one ; the 
book-keeper who keeps the accounts of the tillage and registers 
everything relating thereto ; another official, who prosecutes 
criminals, protects strangers travelling through, and escorts 
them to the next village ; the boundary man, who guards the 
boundaries against neighbouring communities ; the water- 
overseer, who distributes the water from the common tanks 
for irrigation ; the Brahmin, who conducts the religious 
services ; the schoolmaster, who on the sand teaches the 
children reading and writing ; the calendar-Brahmin, or astro- 
loger, who makes known the lucky or unlucky days for seed- 
time and harvest, and for every other kind of agricultural 
work ; a smith and a carpenter, who make and repair all the 
agricultural implements ; the potter, who makes all the pottery 
of the village ; the barber, the washerman, who washes clothes, 
the silversmith, here and there the poet, who in some com- 
munities replaces the silversmith, in others the schoolmaster. 
This dozen of individuals is maintained at the expense oi the 
whole community. If the population increases, a new com- 
munity is founded, on the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied 
land. The whole mechanism discloses a systematic division Oi 

labour; but a division like that in manufactures is impossible 

since the smith and the carpenter, &a, find an unchanging 

market, and at the most there occur, according to the HUBS* *' ! 



JO 



Capitalist Production. 



the villages, two or three of each, instead of one. 1 The law 
that regulates the division of labour in the community acts 
with the irresistible authority of a law of Nature, at the same 
time that each individual artificer, the smith, the carpenter, 
and so on, conducts in his workshop all the operations of his 
handicraft in the traditional way, but independently, and 
without recognizing any authority over him. The simplicity 
of the organisation for production in these self-sufficing com- 
munities that constantly reproduce themselves in the same 
form, and when accidentally destroyed, spring up again on the 
spot and with the same name 2 — this simplicity supplies the 
key to the secret of the unchangeableness of Asiatic societies, 
an unchanofeableness in such striking contrast with the con- 
stant dissolution and refounding of Asiatic States, and the 
never-ceasing changes of dynasty. The structure of the 
economical elements of society remains untouched by the 
storm-clouds of the political sky. 

The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting 
most strictly the number of apprentices and journeymen that a 
single master could employ, prevented him from becoming a 
capitalist. Moreover, he could not employ his journe} T men in 
any other handicraft than the one in which he was a master. 
The guilds zealously repelled every encroachment by the capital 
of merchants, the only form of free capital with which they 
came in contact. A merchant could buy every kind of com- 
modity, but labour as a commodity he could not buy. He 
existed only on sufferance, as a dealer in the products of the 
handicrafts. If circumstances called for a further division of 
labour, the existing guilds split themselves up into varieties, or 

1 Lieut. -Col. Mark Wilks : "Historical Sketches of the South of India." Lond., 
1810-17, v. I., pp. 118-20. A good description of the various forms of the Indian 
communities is to be found in George Campbell's "Modern India." Lond., 1852. 

8 "Under this simple form . . . the inhabitants of the country have lived from 
time immemorial. The boundaries of the villages have been but seldom altered ; and 
though the villages themselves have been sometimes injured, and even desolated by 
war, famine, and disease, the same name, the same limits, the same interests, and 
even the same families, have continued for ages. The inhabitants give themselves 
no trouble about the breaking up and division of kingdoms ; while the village remains 
entire, they care not to what power it is transferred, or to what sovereign it devolves; 
its internal economy remains unchanged." (Th. Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. Gov, 
of Java : " The History of Java." Lond., 1817, Vol. I., p. 285.) 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 



ooj 



founded new guilds by the side of the old ones ; all this, how- 
ever, without concentrating various handicrafts in a single 
workshop. Hence, the guild organization, however much it 
may have contributed by separating, isolating, and perfecting 
the handicrafts, to create the material conditions for the exist- 
ence of manufacture, excluded division of labour in the 
workshop. On the whole, the labourer and his means of pro- 
duction remained closely united, like the snail with its shell, 
and thus there was wanting the principal basis of manufacture, 
the separation of the labourer from his means of production, 
and the conversion of these means into capital. 

While division of labour in society at large, whether such 
division be brought about or not by exchange of commodities, 
is common to economical formations of society the most diverse, 
division of labour in the workshop, as practised by manufacture, 
is a special creation of the capitalist mode of production 
alone. 

SECTION 5. — THE CAPITALISTIC CHARACTER OF MANUFACTURE, 

An increased number of labourers under the control of one 
capitalist is the natural starting-point, as well of co-operation 
generally, as of manufacture in particular. -But the division <>f 
labour in manufacture makes this increase in the number <>t 
workmen a technical necessity. The minimum number that 
any given capitalist is bound to employ is here prescribed by 
the previously established division of labour. On the other 
hand, the advantages of further division are obtainable only 
by adding to the number of workmen, and this can be done 
only by adding multiples of tin; various detail groups, Bui 
an increase in the variable component of the capital employed 
necessitates an increase in its constant component, t< o, in the 
workshops, implements, &c, and, in particular, in the raw 
material, the call for which grows quicker than the number ol 
workmen. The quantity of it consumed in a given time, I 
given amount of labour, increases in the same ratio as does the 
productive power of that labour in con lequence ol its dh i iion. 

Hence, it is a law, based on the very nature of manul 

z 



354 Capitalist Production. 

that the minimum amount of capital, which is bound to be in 
the hands of each capitalist, must keep increasing ; in other 
words, that the transformation into capital of the social means 
of production and subsistence must keep extending. 1 

In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collec- 
tive working organism is a form of existence of capital. The 
mechanism that is made up of numerous individual detail 
labourers belongs to the capitalist. Hence, the productive 
power resulting from a combination of labours appears to be 
the productive power of capital. Manufacture proper not only 
subjects the previously independent workman to the discipline 
and command of capital, but, in addition, creates a hierarchic 
gradation of the workmen themselves. While simple co-opera- 
tion leaves the mode of working by the individual for the most 
part unchanged, manufacture thoroughly revolutionises it, and 
seizes labour-power by its very roots. It converts the labourer 
into a crippled monstrosity, by forcing his detail dexterity 
at the expense of a world of productive capabilities and in- 
stincts; just as in the States of La Plata they butcher a whole 
beast for the sake of his hide or his tallow. Not only is the 
detail work distributed to the different individuals, but the in- 
dividual himself is made the automatic motor of a fractional 
operation, 2 and the absurd fable of Menenius Agrippa, which 
makes man a mere fragment of his own bodv, becomes 
realised. 3 If, at first, the workman sells his labour-pow T er to 
capital, because the material means of producing a commodity 

1 " It is not sufficient that the capital " (the writer should have said the necessary 
means of subsistence and of production) "required for the sub-division of handi- 
crafts should be in readiness in the society : it must also be accumulated in the hands 
of the employers in sufficiently large quantities to enable them to conduct their 
operations on a large scale. . . . The more the division increases, the more does the 
constant employment of a given number of labourers require a greater outlay of capital 
in tools, raw material, &c." (Storch : Cours d'Econ. Polit. Paris Ed., t. I., pp. 250, 
251.) " La concentration des instruments de production et la division du travail sont 
aussi inseparables l'une de l'autrc que le sont, dans le regime politique, la concentra- 
tion des pouvoirs publics et la division des interets prives." (Karl Marx. 1. c, 
p. 134.) 

2 Dugald Stewart calls manufacturing labourers "living automatons . . . employed 
in the details of the work." (1. c, p. 318.) 

3 In corals, each individual is, in fact, the stomach of the whole group ; but it sup- 
plies the group with nourishment, instead of, like the Roman patrician, withdraw- 
ing it. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 355 

fail him, now his very labour-power refuses its services unless 
it has been sold to capital. Its functions can be exercised 
only in an environment that exists in the workshop of the 
capitalist after the sale. By nature unfitted to make anything 
independently, the manufacturing labourer developes produc- 
tive activity as a mere appendage of the capitalist's workshop. 1 
As the chosen people bore in their features the sign manual of 
Jehovah, so division of labour brands the manufacturing work- 
man as the property of capital. 

The knowledge, the judgment, and the will, which, though 
in ever so small a degree, are practised by the independent 
peasant or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage 
makes the whole art of war consist in the exercise of his per- 
sonal cunning — these faculties are now required only for the 
workshop as a whole. Intelligence in production expands in 
one direction, because it vanishes in many others. What is 
lost by the detail labourers, is concentrated in the capital that 
employs them. 2 It is a result of the division of labour in 
manufactures, that the labourer is brought face to face with 
the intellectual potencies of the material process of production, 
us the property of another, and as a ruling power. This sepa- 
ration begins in simple co-operation, where the capitalist re- 
presents to the single workman, the onene8S and the will of 
the associated labour. It is developed in manufacture which 
cuts down the labourer into a detail labourer. It is com 
pleted in modern industry, which makes science a productive 
force distinct from labour and presses it into the service ol 
capital." 

1 " L'ouvrier qui portc dans sea bni tout on metier, pent allcr partov. eon 

Industrie et trouver del moyeni de inbeiater: L'autre(the manufacturing lebi 

qu'uD JicccHsoirt; qui, sc|.;in- dc Ml routines, n';i plus ni OftJMM Ite, ni uh1< ; 

, et qui te brouve force d'aooeptei la loi qu'on Juge ;i propos de lui lmp< 
(Storoh. 1. c. Petersb. edit., L815, t. I., y. 204.) 
1 A. Ferguson, 1. c, j>. 981 \ "The formei may nave gained what the othai 

loHt." 

The man of knowledge and the productive labourat oome to be wid< i> divided 
from < ;k ii other, and knowledge, Instead of remaining the handmaid of labotju la the 
band of the labourei to inoreaee hii productive powera , . . baa almost every « 
againei labour .... lyatematioally deluding and leading then 

lal bray in order to rendei thai] mueoulai powan entirely meohen i 

obedient.' (W. Thompson: " An Inquiry into the Principles ol I 
Wealth. London, Ltta/ j>. 874.) 



356 Capitalist Production. 

In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, 
and through hirn capital, rich in social productive power, each 
labourer must be made poor in individual productive powers. 
" Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. 
Reflection and fancy are subject to err ; but a habit of moving 
the hand or the foot is independent of either. Manufactures, 
accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted, 
and where the workshop may ... be considered as an engine, 
the parts of which are men." 1 As a matter of fact, some 
few manufacturers in the middle of the 18th century preferred, 
for certain operations that were trade secrets, to employ half- 
.'diotic persons. 2 

" The understandings of the greater part of men/' says Adam 
Smith, " are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. 
The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple 
operations . . . has no occasion to exert his understanding. 
.... He generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is 
possible for a human creature to become." After describing 
the stupidity of the detail labourer he goes on : u The uni- 
formity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of 

his mind It corrupts even the activity of his body and 

renders him incapable of exerting his strength with vigour and 
perseverance in any other employments than that to which 
he has been bred. His dexterity at his own particular trade 
seems in this manner to be acquired at the expense of his in- 
tellectual, social, and martial virtues. But in every improved 
and civilised society, this is the state into which the labouring 
poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily 
fall." 3 For preventing the complete deterioration of the great 

1 A. Ferguson, 1. c, p. 280. 

2 J. D. Tuckett : " A History of the Past and Fresent State of the Labouring Popu- 
lation." Lond., 1846. 

3 A. Smith : Wealth of Nations, Bk. V., ch. I., art. II. Being a pupil of A. Fer- 
guson who showed the disadvantageous effects of division of labour, Adam Smith 
was perfectly clear on this point. In the introduction to his work, where he ex pro- 
fesso praises division of labour, he indicates only in a cursory manner that it is the 
source of social inequalities. It is not till the 5th Book, on the Revenue of the State, 
that he reproduces Ferguson. In my " Misere de la Philosophic," I have sufficiently 
explained the historical connection between Ferguson, A. Smith, Lemontey, and Say, 
as regards their criticisms of Division of Labour, and have shown, for the first time, 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 35; 

mass of the people by division of labour, A. Smith recommends 
education of the people by the State, but prudently, and in 
homoeopathic doses. G. Gamier, his French translator and 
commentator, who, under the first French Empire, quite natu- 
rally developed into a senator, quite as naturally opposes him 
on this point. Education of the masses, he urges, violates the 
first law of the division of labour, and with it " our whole 
social system would be proscribed." " Like all other divisions 
of labour," he says, " that between hand labour and head 
labour 1 is more pronounced and decided in proportion as society 
(he rightly uses this word, for capital, landed property and 
their State) becomes richer. This division of labour, like every 
other, is an effect of past, and a cause of future progress .... 
ought the government then to work in opposition to this 
division of labour, and to hinder its natural course ? Ought it 
to expend a part of the public money in the attempt to con- 
found and blend together two classes of labour, which are 
striving after division and separation ? " 2 

Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from 
division of labour in society as a whole. Since, however, manu- 
facture carries this social separation of branches of labour much 
further, and also, by its peculiar division, attacks the individual 
at the very roots of his life, it is the first to afford the materials 
for, and to give a start to, industrial pathology. 3 

" To subdivide a man is to execute him, if he deserves the 

tli.at Division of Labour as practised in manufactures, is a specific form of the <api- 
talist mode of production. 
1 Ferguson had already said, 1. c. p. 281 : "And thinking itself, in this age <>f 

separations, may become ■ peculiar craft." 
- (J. (Jamie t, vol. V. of his translation of A. Smith, ]>p. \ '<. 
'■' Kama/.zini, profeieof of pCBCticeJ medicine at 1'adua, published In 1718 Ins | 

" !><• morbil artificum," which was translated into French 17»1, reprinted I II in the 
" Kncyclopedie des Sciences Medicales. 7 : '"' I Ms. Aut-urs OlMetqUeS." Fill period 
of Modi in M«( hanical Industry has, of oo n r i O , v.iy much enlarged Ml • 

of labour's dis. MM. Be* " Hygiene physique et morale <h- l'oii\ 1 1. r dans I, | mand. - 
villes en general et dans la ville de Lyn en particulier. Par 1> I 1 L •■ I "' ' 
Pniie, L86 ." and M Die Krankheiteii, welehe veiMihiedmn S\mden, Alt-rn und 
ili clitern ei^enthiimlich sind. (> Vols. I'lm, l-nu." an<l otu.is I" 

Society of Arte appointed ■ CommisHion of Inquiry into industrial pathoi.< 

list of documents collected hy this coinmission is to In- seen in the catalogue of 

"Twiokenhnm BoononAe Museum." Very Important ire the official " !-'• 
Pnblifl Health." See also Bdvtfd Reieh, M i> "Uebei die latai 
h inn," Brlangen, I860. 



<i 



58 Capitalist Production. 



sentence, to assassinate him if he does not. . . . The sub- 
division of labour is the assassination of a people." 1 

Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, 
manufacture, commences as a spontaneous formation. So soon 
as it attains some consistence and extension, it becomes the re- 
cognised methodical and systematic form of capitalist produc- 
tion. History shows how the division of labour peculiar to 
manufacture, strictly so called, acquires the best adapted form 
at first by experience, as it were behind the backs of the actors, 
and then, like the guild handicrafts, strives to hold fast that 
form when once found, and here and there succeeds in keeping 
it for centuries. Any alteration in this form, except in trivial 
matters, is solely owing to a revolution in the instruments of 
labour. Modern manufacture wherever it arises — I do not here 
allude to modern industry based on machinery — either finds 
the disjecta membra poetse ready to hand, and only waiting to 
be collected together, as is the case in the manufacture of 
clothes in large towns, or it can easily apply the principle of 
division, simply by exclusively assigning the various operations 
of a handicraft (such as bookbinding) to particular men. In 
such cases, a week's experience is enough to determine the pro- 
portion between the numbers of the hands necessary for the 
various functions. 2 

By decomposition of handicrafts, by specialisation of the in- 
struments of labour, by the formation of detail labourers, and 
by grouping and combining the latter into a single mechanism, 
division of labour in manufacture creates a qualitative grada- 
tion, and a quantitative proportion in the social process of 
production ; it consequently creates a definite organisation of 
the labour of society, and thereby developes at the same time 

1 (D. Urquhart : Familiar Words. Lond., 1855, p. 119.) Hegel held very heretical 
views on division of labour. In his Rechtsphilosophie he says : " By well educated 
men we understand in the first instance, those who can do everything that others 
do." 

2 The simple belief in the inventive genius exercised a priori by the individual 
capitalist in division of labour, exists now-a days only among German professors, of 
the stamp of Herr Roscher, who, to recompense the capitalist from whose Jovian 
head division of labour sprang ready formed, dedicates to him " various wages " 
(diverse Arbeitslohne). The more or less extensive application of division of labour 
depends on length of purse, not on greatness of genius. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 359 

new productive forces in the society. In its specific capitalist 
form — and under the given conditions, it could take no other 
form than a capitalistic one — manufacture is but a particular 
method of begetting relative surplus-value, or of augmenting 
at the expense of the labourer the self-expansion of capital — 
usually called social wealth, " Wealth of Nations," &c. It in- 
creases the social productive power of labour, not only for the 
benefit of the capitalist instead of for that of the labourer, but 
it does this by crippling the individual labourers. It creates 
new conditions for the lordship of capital over labour. If, 
therefore, on the one hand, it presents itself historically as a 
progress and as a necessary phase in the economic develop- 
ment of society, on the other hand it is a refined and civilised 
method of exploitation. 

Political economy, which as an independent science, first 
sprang into being during the period of manufacture, views 
the social division of labour only from the standpoint of 
manufacture, 1 and sees in it only the means of producing more 
commodities with a given quantity of labour, and, conse- 
quently, of cheapening commodities and hurrying on the 
accumulation of capital. In most striking contrast with this 
accentuation of quantity and exchange-value, is the attitude 
of the writers of classical antiquity, who hold exclusively by 
quality and use-value. 2 In consequence of the separation of 
the social branches of production, commodities are better 
made, the various bents and talents of men select a Buitable 

1 The older writers, like Petty and the anonymous author of " Advantaf 
Beat India Trade," bring out the capitalist character of division of labour M Applied 
in manufacture more than A. Smith dots. 

tnongtt the moderns may be excepted a few writers of the 18th century. lik-> 
hi. i and dames Harris, who with regard to division of labour almost entirely 

follow the ancients. Thus, Beocaria: " GKaeouno prora ooll'eeperi aaa, oheapplicando 
la maiio e Llngegno eempre alio siissu genera <li opera e di prodatte, egli pid (ecili, 
i >i u abbondanti e migliori ae trace riaultati, di quello aha as aiasonno Isolatamente la 

we. . . . Dividendoel in tal maniara \ 
couiuiH- e pi ivata atilita gli uomini in rarifl olaaii e condizioni." (Ci -n.- i 
"Element! di Boon. Pubblioa," ad. Ouatodi, Parte Modern*, t. ri., p, 28.) - 1 
Sarria, an. rwardi Bar] of ICalmeebury, eelebrated for the *' Diarii • emheeiy 

at St. Peteraburg, says in a noti I - bii "Dial I B 

1741, reprinted aftenrardi in "Tin. ■ I Load., Lfi 

argnment to prora society natural <<.'.. by diviaion of amploymante) , . . U u 

from the second hook of Plato's RepuMio." 



360 Capitalist Production. 

field, 1 and without some restraint no important results can bo 
obtained anywhere. 1 Hence both product and producer are 
improved by division of labour. If the growth of the quantity 
produced is occasionally mentioned, this is only done with 
reference to the greater abundance of use-values. There is not 
a word alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of 
commodities. This aspect, from the standpoint of use-value 
alone, is taken as well by Plato, 3 who treats division of labour 
as the foundation on which the division of society into classes 
is based, as by Xenophon, 4 who with characteristic bourgeois 

1 Thus, in the Odyssey xiv., 228, ""AXXoj yap rxXXouri* uvhp WtripTtrat tyyot;,'' 
and Archilochus in Sextus Empiricus, " a\\os a\\u W tpyo* xapl'w iairtreti." 

2 "n^XA.' '/iritrraro tpya., xaxu; *h'hv'isTa,ro Tcivra.." Every Athenian considered him- 
self superior as a producer of commodities to a Spartan ; for the latter in time of 
war had men enough at his disposal but could not command money, as Thucydides 
makes Pericles say in the speech inciting the Athenians to the Peloponnesiau war : 

treuftacrt rt eToiftoripot ol avrovpyol Tuv avt)puTwv 7) %pv/£a<rt Toktrilv." (TllUC : 1. I. C 
41.) Nevertheless, even with regard to material production, avrapxiia, as opposed 
to division of labour remained their ideal, »' Tap Zv yap to il, -rapa. rwrtn xal r» 
aSrapxu." It should be mentioned here that at the date of the fall of the 30 Tyrants 
there were still not 5000 Athenians without landed property. 

3 With Plato, division of labour within the community is a development from the 
multifarious requirements, and the limited capacities of individuals. The main point 
with him is, that the labourer must adapt himself to the work, not the work to the 
labourer ; which latter is unavoidable, if lie carries on several trades at once, thus 
making one or the other of them subordinate. " Ov yap \fiku to rparr'ofAiiot tyi* t*u 
vrpaTTovTos <r%o\hv T'ptu'ivnv, akk' avdyxw Tov TpaTTovTa tm TpaTrofx.i>u iTaxo\ou6tiv (*ri 
iv Tapipyov ft'ipsi. — Avdyxn. — 'Ex <5tj toutuv Tkiioo Ti exztrra yiyviTai xal xaXXiiv xal 
pxov, oTav 11; €» xara. <p6<riv xal tv xatpZ o-%o\r t v Tuv aA>&/v dysuv TpaTrri" (Rep. 1. 2. Ed. 

Baiter, Orelli, &c). So in Thucydides 1. c. c, 42: "Seafaring is an art like any- 
other, and cannot, as circumstances require, be carried on as a subsidiary occupation ; 
nay, other subsidiary occupations cannot be carried on alongside of this one." If the 
work, says Plato, has to wait for the labourer, the critical point in the process is 
missed and the article spoiled, 'ipyou xaipc* SioWuTai." The same Platonic idea is 
found recurring in the protest of the English bleachers against the clause in the 
Factory Act that provides fixed meal times for all operative?. Their business cannot 
wait the convenience of the workmen, for " in the various operations of singeing, 
washing, bleaching, mangling, calendering, and dyeing, none of them can be stopped 
at a given moment without risk of damage .... to enforce the same dinner hour 
for all the work-people might occasionally subject valuable goods to the risk of danger 
by incomplete operations." Le platonisme ou va-t-il se nicher ! 

4 Xenophon says, it i* not only an honour to receive food from the table of the King 
of Persia, but such food i* much more tasty than other food. "And there is nothing 
wonderful in this, for as tb3 other arts are brought to special perfection in the great 
towns, so the royal food is prepared in a special way. For in the small towns the 
same man makes bedsteads, doors, ploughs, and tables : often, too, he builds houses 
into the bargain, and s quite content if he finds custom sufficient for his sustenance. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 361 

instinct, approaches more nearly to division of labour within 
the workshop. Plato's Republic, in so far as division of labour 
is treated in it, as the formative principle of the State, is 
merely the Athenian idealisation of the Egyptian system of 
castes, Egypt having served as the model of an industrial 
country to many of his contemporaries also, amongst others to 
Isocrates, 1 and it continued to have this importance to the 
Greeks of the Roman Empire. 2 

During the manufacturing period proper, i.e., the period 
during which manufacture is the predominant form taken by 
capitalist production, many obstacles are opposed to the full 
development of the peculiar tendencies of manufacture. 
Although manufacture creates, as we have already seen, a 
simple separation of the labourers into skilled and unskilled, 
simultaneously with their hierarchic arrangement in clafi 
yet the number of the unskilled labourers, owing to the pre- 
ponderating influence of the skilled, remains very limited. 
Although it adapts the detail operations to the various degrees 
of maturity, strength, and development of the living instru- 
ments of labour, thus conducing to exploitation of women and 
children, yet this tendency as a whole is wrecked on the habits 
and the resistance of the male labourers. Although the 

It is altogether impossible for a man who does so many things to do them all well. 
J5ut in the great towns, where each can find many buyers, one trade is lufficu int to 
maintain the man who carries it on. Nay, there is often not even need of MM com 
plete trade, but one man makes shoes for men, another for women. Here and th< re 
one man gets a living by sewing, another by cutting out sinus ; on 'thing but 

cut out clothes, another nothing but sew the pieces together. It follows m ceeearirj 
then, that he who does the simplest kind of work, un.loul.te.il y doe* it hi ttei than 

anyone elie. So it i» with the art of cooking." (Xes. Cyrop, 1. riii.,0. -.) Keno 
phon here lay« itreei exoluaively upon the exoellenoe to be attained in uee-value, 

although he well Knows that the gi ;ul;it ions of the division of labour defM ml on the 
extent of the market. 

'He (Butiria) divided ahem all into ipeciaJ oaatea oommanded thai 

MBM Individual! lhonld always carry on the same trade, f<T he knew th;it tie y who 

< hange then- occupation! beoome skilled in none ; but thai thoee who oonatantlj 
t.» one occupation bring it to tie perfection. In truth, we ihall alec ft] 

in relation to the arte and bendicrafta, they have outstripped theix 1 
maater doea a bungler ; and the oonl foi maintaining the monarchy and th. 

other inatitutiom of their State are ao admirable that the mod ad philo 

aopheri who treat of thii lubjeot praiac .lie oonatitutioo of the B jrpMan Btata abovt 
lllothera. (Iaooratee, Bu Iria, 0. b.) 
2 Of. Diodorui Sioulua. 



J 



62 Capitalist Production. 



splitting up of handicrafts lowers the cost of forming the work- 
man, and thereby lowers his value, yet for the more difficult 
detail work, a longer apprenticeship is necessary, and, even 
where it would be superfluous, is jealously insisted upon by 
the workmen. Ln England, for instance, we find the laws of 
apprenticeship, with their seven years' probation, in full force 
down to the end of the manufacturing period ; and they are 
not thrown on one side till the advent of Modern Industry. 
Since handicraft skill is the foundation of manufacture, and 
since the mechanism of manufacture as a whole possesses no 
framework, apart from the labourers themselves, capital is con- 
stantly compelled to wrestle with the insubordination of the 
workmen. " By the infirmity of human nature," says friend 
Ure, "it happens that the more skilful the workman, the more 
self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and of course 
the less fit a component of a mechanical system in which . . . 
he may do great damage to the whole." 1 Hence throughout 
the whole manufacturing period there runs the complaint of 
want of discipline among the workmen. 2 And had we not the 
testimony of contemporary writers, the simple facts, that during 
the period between the 16th century and the epoch of Modern 
Industry, capital failed to become the master of the whole 
disposable working-time of the manufacturing labourers, that 
manufactures are short-lived, and change their locality from 
one country to another with the emigrating or immigrating 
workmen, these facts would speak volumes. " Order must in 
one way or another be established," exclaims in 1770 the oft- 
cited author of the " Essay on Trade and Commerce." " Order," 
re-echoes Dr. Andrew Ure 66 years later, " Order " was wanting 
in manufacture based on " the scholastic do<mia of division of 
labour," and " Arkwright created order." 

At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize 
upon the production of society to its full extent, or to re- 
volutionise that production to its very core. It towered up as 
an economical work of art, on the broad foundation of the town 

1 Ure, 1. c, p. 20. 

2 This is more the case in England than in France, and more in France than in 
Holland. 



Division of Labour and Manufacture. 36 



5 



handicrafts, and of the rural domestic industries. At a given 
stage in its development, the narrow technical basis on which 
manufacture rested, came into conflict with requirements of 
production that were created by manufacture itself. 

One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the 
production of the instruments of labour themselves, including 
especially the complicated mechanical apparatus then already 
employed. A machine-factory, says Ure, "displayed the division 
of labour in manifold gradations — the file, the drill, the lathe, 
having each its different workman in the order of skill." (p. 21.) 
'\ his workshop, the product of the division of labour in manufac- 
ture, produced in its turn — machines. It is they that sweep away 
the handicraftsman's work as the regulating principle of social 
production. Thus, on the one hand, the technical reason for 
the life-Ion^ annexation of the workman to a detail function 
is removed. On the other hand, the fetters that this same 
principle laid on the dominion of capital, fall away. 



CAPITALIST PRODUCTION. 



PART IV.— (Continued.) 
PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE. 



CHAPTER XV. 

MACHINERY AND MODKRN INDUSTRY. 

SKCTION 1. THK DKVELOI'.MKNT OF M A< II IN F. I: \ . 

JOHN STUAKT MILL says in his Principles of Political 
Economy : " It is questionable if all the mechanical inven 
tiona yet made have Lightened the day's toil of any human 
being." 1 That is, however, by no means the aim of the capi- 
talistic application of machinery. Like everj other Lncrei 
in the productiveness of Labour, machinery is intended to 
cheapen commodities, and, by shortening thai portion oi 
working-day, in which the labourer works for himself, 

1 Mill sliould liavr s.-ii.l, "of any luuniin In-iii- DOi fed bj <>tlni 

i it, without doubt, in .t'-niiifi ) bai pwtlj in 



J 



66 Capitalist Production. 



lengthen the other portion that he gives, without an equivalent, 
to the capitalist. In short, it is a means for producing surplus- 
value. 

In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production 
begins with the labour-power, in modern industry it begins 
with the instruments of labour. Our first inquiry then is, 
how the instruments of labour are converted from tools into 
machines, or what is the difference between a machine and the 
implements of a handicraft ? We are only concerned here with 
striking and general characteristics ; for epochs in the history 
of society are no more separated from each other by hard and 
fast lines of demarcation, than are geological epochs. 

Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are fol- 
lowed by a few English economists, call a tool a simple machine, 
and a machine a complex tool. They see no essential differ- 
ence between them, and even give the name of machine to the 
simple mechanical powers, the lever, the inclined plane, the 
screw, the wedge, fcc. 1 As a matter of fact, every machine is 
a combination of those simple powers, no matter how they 
may be disguised. From the economical standpoint this ex- 
planation is worth nothing, because the historical element is 
wanting. Another explanation of the difference between tool and 
macl. ine is that in the case of a tool, man is the motive power, 
Avhile the motive power of a machine is something different 
from man, is, for instance, an animal, water, wind, and so on. 2 
According to this, a plough drawn by oxen, which is a con- 
trivance common to the most different epochs, would be a 
machine, while Claussen's circular loom, which, worked by a 
single labourer, weaves 96,000 picks per minute, would be a 
mere tool. Nay, this very loom, though a tool when worked 
by hand, would, if worked by steam, be a machine. And since 
the application of animal power is one of man's earliest inven- 

1 See, for instance, Hutton : " Course of Mathematics." 

2 " From this point of view we may draw a sharp line of distinction between a tool 
and a machine : spades, hammers, chisels, &c. , combinations of levers and of screws, 
in all of which, no matter how complicated they may be in other respects, man is the 

motive power, all this falls under the idea of a tool ; but the plough, which 

is drawn by animal power, and windmills, &c, must be classed among machines." 
(Wilhelm Schulz : " Die Bewegung der Production. Zurich, 1843," p. 38.) In many 
respects a book to be recommended. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 367 

tions, production by machinery would have preceded produc- 
tion by handicrafts. When in 1735, John Wyalt brought out 
his spinning machine, and began the industrial revolution of 
the 18th century, not a word did he say about an ass driving 
it instead of a man, and yet this part fell to the ass. He de- 
scribed it as a machine "to spin without ringers." 1 

All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially 
different parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechan- 
ism, and finally the tool or working machine. The motor 
mechanism is that which puts the whole in motion. It either 
generates its own motive power, like the steam engine, the 
caloric engine, the electro-magnetic machine, &c, or it receives 
its impulse from some already existing natural force, like the 
water-wheel from a head of water, the wind-mill from wind, 
&c. The transmitting mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, 
shafting, toothed wheels, pullies, straps, ropes, bands, pinion-. 
and gearing of the most varied kinds, regulates the motion, 
changes its form where necessary, as for instance, from linear 
to circular, and divides and distributes it among the working 
machines. These two first parts of the whole mechanism are 
there, solely for putting the working machines in motion, by 
means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon 

1 Before his time, spinning machines, although very imperfect ones, had already 
been used, and Italy was probably the country of their finl appearanoe. A critical 
history of technology would show how little any of the invention! of the 18th century 
are the work of a single individual. Hitherto there is no such book. Darwin has 
in** rented us in the history of Nature's Technology, i.e. , in the formation of the 01 
of plants and animals, which organs serve as instruments of production for sustaining 
life. Da I not the history of the productive organs of man, of organs that an the 
material basis of all social 09 gBJliaation, 6V esei I 6 equal attention? And would not 
nucha !n tory be eerier to compile, since, as Vico says, human history differ! from 
natural history in this, that we have made tin- farm< i, but not the latter'.' Techno- 
logy dieoloCM man's mode of dealing with Nature, the process of production by which 
tains his life, and thereby also lays ban- the mode of formation of his social 

relation!, and of the mental oonoeptioii! that Bow from them. Bvery hiatorj of >< 
Hgion even, that fail! to take aoooont of this material '> a» -. leuncritioaL it is, in 
v, much eaii< r to diecover by analysis the earthly core of the miity oreatioi 
on, than, eonversely, it is, to develop From the actual i of life tl 

ponding celeetialiaed forma of those relatione. The latter method ia the only n 
rlaliatio, and therefore the only ecientifio one. Tie ireafc points in the ebetraol 
materialiam of natural a that exclude! biitoryand Iteproi 

t once evident from the abetract and Ideological concepts 

Whenever they venture beyond the bounds of their own speciality 



368 Capitalist Production. 

and modified as desired. The tool or working-machine is that 
part of the machinery with which the industrial revolution of 
the 18th century started. And to this day it constantly serves 
as such a starting point, whenever a handicraft, or a manu- 
facture, is turned into an industry carried on by machinery. 

On a closer examination of the working-machine proper, we 
iind in it, as a general rule, though often, no doubt, under very 
altered forms, the apparatus and tools used by the handicrafts- 
man or manufacturing workman ; with this difference, that 
instead of being human implements, they are the implements 
of a mechanism, or mechanical implements. Either the entire 
machine is only a more or less altered mechanical edition of 
the old handicraft tool, as, for instance, the power-loom j 1 or 
the working parts fitted in the frame of the machine are old 
acquaintances, as spindles are in a mule, needles in a stocking- 
loom, saws in a sawing machine, and knives in a chopping 
machine. The distinction between these tools and the body 
proper of the machine, exists from their very birth ; for they 
continue for the most part to be produced by handicraft, or by 
manufacture, and are afterwards fitted into the body of the 
machine, which is the product of machinery. 2 The machine 
proper is therefore a mechanism that, after being set in motion, 
performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly 
done by the workman with similar tools. Whether the motive 
power is derived from man, or from some other machine, makes 
no difference in this respect. From the moment that the tool 
proper is taken from man, and fitted into a mechanism, a 
machine takes the place of a mere implement. The difference 
strikes one at once, even in those cases where man himself 
continues to be the prime mover. The number of implements 
that he himself can use simultaneously, is limited by the 

1 Especially in the original form of the power-loom, we recognise, at the first 
glance, the ancient loom. In its modern form, the power-loom has undergone essen- 
tial alterations. 

2 It is only during the last 15 years {i.e., since ahout 1850), that a constantly 
increasing portion of these machine tools have been made in England by machinery, 
and that not by the same manufacturers who make the machines. Instances of 
machines for the fabrication of these mechanical tools are, the automatic bobbin - 
making engine, the card-setting engine, shuttle-making machines, and machines for 
forging mule and throstle spindles. 



Machinery and Modern Industry, 369 

number of his own natural instruments of production, by the 
number of his bodily organs. In Germany, they tried at first 
to make one spinner work two spinning wheels, that is, to 
work simultaneously with both hands and both feet. This 
was too difficult. Later, a treddle spinning wheel with two 
spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning, who could spin 
two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two-headed men. 
The Jenny, on the other hand, even at its very birth, spun 
with 12-18 spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many 
thousand needles at once. The number of tools that a machine 
can bring into play simultaneously, is from the very first 
emancipated from the organic limits that hedge in the tools of 
a handicraftsman. 

In many manual implements the distinction between man as 
mere motive power, and man as the workman or operator 
properly so-called, is brought into striking contrast. For in- 
stance, the foot is merely the prime mover of the spinning 
wheel, while the hand, working with the spindle, and drawing 
and twisting, performs the real operation ot spinning. It is 
this last part of the handicraftsman's implement that is first 
seized upon by the industrial revolution, leaving to the work- 
man, in addition to his new labour of watch in 2: the machine 
with his eyes and correcting its mistakes with his hands, the 
merely mechanical part of being the moving power. On the 
other hand, implements, in regard to which man has always 
acted as a simple motive power, as, for instance, by turning the 
crank of a mill, 1 by pumping, by moving up and down the arm 
of a bellows, by pounding with a mortar, &c, such implements 
soon call for the application of animals, water, 2 and wind as 

1 Mosos says : " Thou shaltnot muzzle the ox that treads the corn." The Christian 
philanthropists of Germany, on the contrary, fattened a wooden board round the 

necks of the serfs, whom they used as a motive power for grinding, in Ordei to pre* 
vent them from putting flour into their mouths with their hands. 

a It was partly the want of streams witli a good fall on them, and partly their 
battles witli superabundance of water in other respects, that eoinpelle.l the I > 1 1 * 
resort to wind as a motive power. The windmill itself they got from I let many, | 

its invention was the origin of a pretty squabble between the nobles, the pi l< I ■ and 
the emperor, as to which of those three the wind " belonged. M The air makei bond* 
age, was the cry in Germany, at the tame time that the wind wet making Holland 

free. What it reduced to bondage; in this < ase, was not tin hutchmin, luit the land 

2 A 



37° Capitalist Production. 

motive powers. Here and there, long before the period of 
manufacture, and also, to some extent, during that period, 
these implements pass over into machines, but without creat- 
ing any revolution in the mode of production. It becomes 
evident, in the period of Modern Industry, that these imple- 
ments, even under their form of manual tools, are already 
machines. For instance, the pumps with which the Dutch, in 
L836-7, emptied the Lake of Harlem, were constructed on the 
principle of ordinary pumps ; the only difference being, thai 
their pistons were driven by cyclopean steam-engines, instead 
of by men. The common and very imperfect bellows of the 
blacksmith is, in England, occasionally converted into a blowing- 
engine, by connecting its arm with a steam-engine. The steam- 
engine itself, such as it was at its invention, during the manu- 
facturing period at the close of the 17th century, and such as 
it continued to be down to 1780/ did not give rise to any in- 
dustrial revolution. It was, on the contrary, the invention of 
machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines 
necessary. As soon as man, instead of working with an imple- 
ment on the subject of his labour, becomes merely the motive 
power of an implement-machine, it is a mere accident that 
motive power takes the disguise of human muscle ; and it may 
equally well take the form of wind, water or steam. Of course, 
this does not prevent such a change of form from producing 
great technical alterations in the mechanism that was originally 
constructed to be driven by man alone. Nowadays, all machines 
that have their way to make, such as sewing machines, bread- 
making machines, &c, are, unless from their very nature their 
use on a small scale is excluded, constructed to be driven both 
by human and by purely mechanical motive power. 

The machine, which is the starting point of the industrial 
revolution, supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, 
by a mechanism operating with a number of similar tools, and 

for the Dutchman. In 1830, 12,000 windmills of 0000 horse-power were still em- 
ployed in Holland, to prevent two-thirds of the land from being reconverted into 
morasses. 

- It was, indeed, very much improved by Watt's first so-called single acting engine : 
but, in this form, it continued to be a mere machine for raising water, and the liquor 
from salt mines. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 371 

set in motion by a single motive power, whatever the form of 
that power may be. 1 Here we have the machine, but only as 
an elementary factor of production by machinery. 

Increase in the size of the machine, and in the number of its 
working tools, calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it ; 
and this mechanism requires, in order to overcome its resist- 
ance, a mightier moving power than that of man, apart from 
the fact that man is a very imperfect instrument for producing 
uniform continued motion. But assuming that he is acting 
simply as a motor, that a machine has taken the place of his 
tool, it is evident that he can be replaced by natural forces. 
Of all the great motors handed down from the manufacturing 
period, horse-power is the worst, partly because a horse has a 
head of his own, partly because he is costly, and the extent to 
which he is applicable in factories is very restricted. 2 Never- 
theless the horse was extensively used during the infancy of 
Modern Industry. This is proved, as well by the complaints of 
contemporary agriculturists, as by the term " horse-power," 
which has survived to this day as an expression for mechanical 
force. 

Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in 

"The union of all these simple instruments, set in motion by a single motor, con- 
stitutes a machine." (Babbage, 1. c.) 

' In January, 1861, John 0. Morton read before the Society of Arts a paper on 

M The forces i mployed in agriculture." He there Rtates : " Every improvement that 

fni t hers the uniformity of the land makes the steam-engine more rind more applicable 

to the production of pure mechanical force. . . . Horse-power is requisite win i< ft \ 

- and other obstruction! prevent uniform action. These obstructions 

vanishing day by day. For operations that demand more exercise of will than 

actual force, the only powei applicable Is thai oontroll* d every instant by the human 

Tiiind in other words, man-power. " Mr. Morton then •» duces steam-nower, In me* 

r, and man power, to the unit in general use foi ■team ei ines, namely, the 

fun-.' required to raise 83,000 lbs. one foot in one minute, and reckons the oosl oi 

powei from a steam engine to be 3d., and from a horse to be 5id. per hour. 

Further, if B horse must fully maintain its health, it can uoik no mOTC than 8 hOQXS 

a day. Three al the hast oul of i n rj even hoi h - d d on tillage land during the 

can be dispensed with by using steam-power, at an wpwff aoi greater than 

thai which, tin hoi ies dispt d ed with, won id oosl during the •"• a i months In which 

alone they can be used effectively. I i-power, intl dturalop 

in which it cm be emplo] d, improvi ■ . In comparison with hoi r, the 

quality of the wuik. To do the work of • strain < ■n-iiu- would require 86 nil n 
in hour, and to do the work of u horse, 82 BM&, at * total Ot 
an hour. 



J 



72 Capitalist Production. 



England, the birthplace of Modern Industry, the use of water- 
power preponderated even during the manufacturing period. 
In the 17th century attempts had already been made to turn 
two pairs of millstones with a single water-wheel. But the 
increased size of the gearing was too much for the water- 
power, which had now become insufficient, and this was one 
of the circumstances that led to a more accurate investigation 
of the laws of friction. In the same way the irregularity 
caused by the motive power in mills that were put in motion 
by pushing and pulling a lever, led to the theory, and the 
application, of the fly-wheel, which afterwards plays so im- 
portant a part in Modern Industry. 1 In this way, during the 
manufacturing period, were developed the first scientific and 
technical elements of Modern Mechanical Industry. Ark Wright's 
throstle-spinning mill was from the veiy first turned by water. 
But for all that, the use of water, as the predominant motive 
power, was beset with difficulties. It could not be increased at 
will, it failed at certain seasons of the year, and, above all, it 
was essentially local. 2 Not till the invention of Watt's second 
and so called double-acting steam-engine, was a prime mover 
found, that begot its own force by the consumption of coal and 
water, whose power was entirely under man's control, that was 
mobile and a means of locomotion, that was urban and not, 
like the water-wheel, rural, that permitted production to be 
concentrated in towns instead of, like the water-wheels, being 
scattered up and down the country, 3 that was of universal 
technical application, and, relatively speaking, little affected in 
its choice of residence by local circumstances. The greatness 

1 Faulhebr, 1G25 ; De Cous, 1688. 

2 The modern turbine frees the industrial exploitation of water-power from many 
of its former fetters. 

3 "In the early days of textile manufactures, the locality of the factory depended 
upon the existence of a stream having a sufficient fall to turn a water-wheel ; and, 
although the establishment of the water mills was the commencement of the breaking 
up of the domestic system of manufacture, yet the mills necessarily situated tpon 
streams, and frequently at considerable distances the one from the other, formed part 
of a rural, rather than an urban system ; and it was not until the introduction of the 
steam-power as a substitute for the stream that factories were congregated in towns, 
and localities where the coal and water required for the production of steam were found 
in sufficient quantities. The steam-engine is the parent of manufacturing t^wns." (A. 
Redgrave in " Reports of the Insp. of Fact. 30th April, 1866," p. 36.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. ^73 

of Watt's genius showed itself in the specification of the patent 
that he took out in April, 1784 In that specification his steam- 
engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose, 
hut as an agent universally applicable in Mechanical Industiy. 
In it he points out applications, many of which, as for instance, 
the steam-hammer, were not introduced till half a century 
later. Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines in 
navigation. His successors, Boulton and Watt, sent to the 
exhibition of 1851 steam-engines of colossal size for ocean 
steamers. 

As soon as tools had been converted from being manual 
implements of man into implements of a mechanical apparatus, 
of a machine, the motive mechanism also acquired an indepen- 
dent form, entirely emancipated from the restraints of human 
strength. Thereupon the individual machine, that we have 
hitherto been considering, sinks into a mere factor in produc- 
tion by machinery. One motive mechanism was now able to 
drive many machines at once. The motive mechanism grows 
with the number of the machines that are turned simul- 
taneously, and the transmitting mechanism becomes a wide- 
spreading apparatus. 

We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a 
number of machines of one kind from a complex system of 
machinery. 

In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single 
machine, which performs all the various operations previously 
done by one handicraftsman with his tool; as, for instance, by 
a weaver with his loom ; or by several handicraftsmen succ< 
ively, either separately or as members of a system of Manufac- 
ture. 1 For example, in the manufacture of envelopes, one 
man folded the paper with the folder, another laid on the 

1 From the atandpoint of division of labour in Manufacture, weaving was nol 
ftlmple, but, on the contrary, complicated manual labour; and consequently the 

power-loom iH a machine that docs very complicated work. It is altogether erroQi 
to suppose that modern machinery originally appropriated thoee operation! alone, 
which division of labour ha«l simplified. Spinning and weaving were, daring the 

manufacturing period, split up into new species, ami the implement! • I ' ■ modified 

;m<l improved ; but the labour itself was in no way divided, and it retained its hamli 

« raft oharacter. It i! not the labour) but the instrument of labour, that •erret ai 
the starting point of the machines 



374 Capitalist Production. 

gum, a third turned the Hap over, on which the device is 
impressed, a fourth embossed the device, and so on ; and for 
each of these operations the envelope had to change hands. 
( >ne single envelope machine now performs all these operations 
at once, and makes more than 3000 envelopes in an hour. In 
the London exhibition of 18G2, there was an American machine 
for making paper cornets. It cut the paper, pasted, folded, 
and finished 300 in a minute. Here, the whole process, which, 
when carried on as Manufacture, was split up into, and carried 
out by, a series of operations, is completed by a single machine, 
working a combination of various tools. Now, whether such 
a machine be merely a reproduction of a complicated manual 
implement, or a combination of various simple implements 
specialised by Manufacture, in either case, in the factory, i.e., 
in the workshop in which machinery alone is used, we meet 
again with simple co-operation ; and, leaving the workman 
out of consideration for the moment, this co-operation presents 
itself to us, in the first instance, as the conglomeration in one 
place of similar and simultaneously acting machines. Thus, a 
weaving factory is constituted of a number of power-loom>, 
working side by side, and a sewing factory of a number of 
sewing machines all in the same building. But there is here 
a technical oneness in the whole system, owing to all the 
machines receiving their impulse simultaneously, and in an 
equal degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, 
by the intermediary of the transmitting mechanism; and this 
mechanism, to a certain extent, is also common to them all, 
since only particular ramifications of it branch off to each 
machine. Just as a number of tools, then, form the organs of 
a machine, so a number of machines of one kind constitute the 
organs of the motive mechanism. 

A real machinery system, however, does not take the place 
of these independent machines, until the subject of labour gee- 
through a connected series of detail processes, that are carried 
out by a chain of machines of various kinds, the one supple- 
menting the other. Here we have again the co-operation by 
division of labour that characterises Manufacture; only now, 
it is a combination of detail machines. The special tools of 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 375 

the various detail workmen, such as those of the beaters, 
combers, spinners, &c, in the woollen manufacture, are now 
transformed into the tools of specialised machines, each 
machine constituting a special organ, with a special function, 
in the system. In those branches of industry in which the 
machinery system is first introduced, Manufacture itself fur- 
nishes, in a general way, the natural basis for the division, 
and consequent organisation, of the process of production. 1 
Nevertheless an essential difference at once manifests itself. In 
Manufacture it is the workmen who, with their manual imple- 
ments, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each par- 
ticular detail process. If, on the one hand, the workman be- 
comes adapted to the process, on the other, the process was 
previously made suitable to the workman. This subjective 
principle of the division of labour no longer exists in produc- 
tion by machinery. Here, the process as a whole is examine 1 
objectively, in itself, that is to say, without regard to the 
question of its execution by human hands, it is analysed into 
its constituent phases ; and the problem, how to execute each 
detail process, and bind them all into a whole, is solved by the 
aid of machines, chemistry, &c. 2 But, of course, in this case 
also, theory must be perfected by accumulated experience on a 

1 Before the epoch of Mechanical Imlustry, the wool manufacture was the pre- 
dominating manufacture in England. Hence it was in this industry that, in the first 
half of tlu: 18th century, the most experiments were made. Cotton, which required 
'.ireful preparation for its treatment by machinery, derived the benefit of the 
rience gained on wool, just aa afterwards the manipulation of wool by machin- 
ery was developed on the lines of cotton-spinning and weaving by machinery. It 
was only dining the 10 years immediately preceding 1866, that isolated d< 

of the wool manufacture, such as wool-combing, were incorporated in the factor] 

em. "The spplication of power to the process of oombing wool . . . . 

exten ively in operation Mine the introduction of the combing machine, especially 

Lister'i . . . undoubtedly had the effeoi of throwing ■ rery large number of men 

• f work. Wool w;is formerly oombed by hand, most frequently In the ootte 

tin- comber. It is nowveiy generally combed in tin factory, and hand-labour is 

rapei eded, except in some particular kinds of work, in which hand-combed wool is 
■tUlprefem >l. Many of the band-oomtx n found < mploynx n1 in thi il the 

produOC "f the hand OOmbeTI bears so small a proportion to that of the machine, that 

the employment of a rery large number of oomben has pass* d away." I li' p. ol I 
of Fa.t. to. :;i t < i« t., I J56, p. in.) 

3 "The principle of the fi a, then, is to substitute .... the partition 

ofaprooesi Into \\ the division "i graduation of labom 

among art] ana." (Andrew Uru: "The PhiloeoohY of Manuis Ixmd., I 

P. 20.) 



37^ Capitalist Production. 

large scale. Each detail machine supplies raw material to the 
machine next in order; and since they are all working at the 
same time, the product is always going through the various 
stages of its fabrication, and is also constantly in a state of 
transition, from one phase to another. Just as in Manufacture, 
the direct co-operation of the detail labourers establishes a 
numerical proportion between the special groups, so in an 
organised system of machinery, where one detail machine is 
constantly kept employed by another, a fixed relation is estab- 
lished between their numbers, their size, and their speed. The 
collective machine, now an organised system of various kinds 
of single machines, and of groups of single machines, becomes 
more and more perfect, the more the process as a whole be- 
comes a continuous one, i.e., the less the raw material is inter- 
rupted in its passage from its first phase to its last ; in other 
words, the more its passage from one phase to another is 
effected, not by the hand of man, but by the machinery itself. 
In Manufacture the isolation of each detail process is a condi- 
tion imposed by the nature of division of labour, but in the 
fully developed factory the continuity of those processes is, 
on the contrary, imperative. 

A system of machinery, whether it reposes on the mere co- 
operation of similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combina- 
tion of different machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself 
a huge automaton, whenever it is driven by a self-acting prime 
mover. But although the factory as a whole be driven by its 
steam-engine, yet either some of the individual machines may 
require the aid of the workman for some of their movements 
(such aid was necessary for the running in of the mule carriage, 
before the invention of the self-acting mule, and is still neces- 
sary in fine-spinning mills); or, to enable a machine to do its 
work, certain parts of it may require to be handled by the 
workman like a manual tool ; this was the case in machine- 
makers' workshops, before the conversion of the slide rest into 
a self-actor. As soon as a machine executes, without man's 
help, all the movements requisite to elaborate the raw material, 
needing only attendance from him, we have an automatic 
feystem of machinery, and one that is susceptible of constant 



Machinery and Modern Industry. ^y 

improvement in its details. Such improvements as the appa- 
ratus that stops a drawing frame, whenever a sliver breaks, 
and the self-acting stop, that stops the power-loom so soon as 
the shuttle bobbin is emptied of weft, are quite modern inven- 
tions. As an example, both of continuity of production, and 
of the carrying out of the automatic principle, we may take a 
modern paper mill. In the paper industry generally, we may 
advantageously study in detail not only the distinctions be- 
tween modes of production based on different means of produc- 
tion, but also the connexion of the social conditions of 
production with those modes: for the old German paper-mak- 
ing furnishes us with a sample of handicraft production ; that 
of Holland in the 17th and of France in the 18th century with 
a sample of manufacturing in the strict sense ; and that of 
modern England with a sample of automatic fabrication of this 
article. Besides these, there still exist, in India and China, 
two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the same industry. 

An organised system of machines, to which motion is com- 
municated by the transmitting mechanism from a central 
automaton, is the most developed form of production by 
machinery. Here we have, in the place of the isolated 
machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole fac- 
tories, and whose demon power, at first veiled under the slow 
and measured motions of his giant limbs, at length breaks out 
into the fast and furious whirl of his countless working organa 

There were mules and steam-engines before there were any 
labourers, whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules 
and steam-engines; just as men wore clothes before there were 
such people as bailors. The inventions of Vaucanson, Ark- 
wright, Watt, and others, were, however, practicable, only 
because those inventors found, ready to hand, a considerable 
number of skilled mechanical workmen, placed at their <li - 
il l>y the manufacturing period Some of these workmen 
were independent handicraft smen of various trades, others were 
grouped together in manufactures, in which, as before-men 
tinned, division of labour was strictly carried out As inven- 
tions increased in number, and the demand for the newlv 
discovered machines grew larger, the machine-making industry 



$~S Capitalist Production. 

•split up, more and more, into numerous independent brandies, 
and division of labour in these manufactures was more and 
more developed Here, then, we see in Manufacture the imme- 
diate technical foundation of Modern Industr}'. Manufacture 
produced the machinery, by means of which Modern Industry 
abolished the handicraft and manufacturing systems in those 
spheres of production that it first seized upon. The factory 
system was therefore raised, in the natural course of things, on 
an inadequate foundation. When the system attained to a 
certain degree of development, it had to root up this ready-made 
foundation, which in the meantime had been elaborated on the 
old lines, and to build up for itself a basis that should corres- 
pond to its methods of production. Just as the individual 
machine retains a dwarfish character, so long as it is worked 
by the power of man alone, and just as no system of machinery 
could be properly developed before the steam-engine took the 
place of the earlier motive powers, animals, wind, and even 
water; so, too, Modern Industry was crippled in its complete 
development, so long as its characteristic instrument of pro- 
duction, the machine, owed its existence to personal strength 
and personal skill, and depended on the muscular develop- 
ment, the keenness of sight, and the cunning of hand, with 
which the detail workmen in manufactures, and the manual 
labourers in handicrafts, wielded their dwarfish implements. 
Thus, apart from the dearness of the machines made in this 
way, a circumstance that is ever present to the mind of the 
capitalist, the expansion of industries carried on by means of 
machinery, and the invasion by machinery of fresh branches of 
production, were dependent on the growth of a class of work- 
men, who, owing to the almost artistic nature of their employ- 
ment, could increase their numbers only gradually, and not by 
leaps and bounds. But besides this, at a certain stage of its 
development, Modern Industry became technologically incom- 
patible with the basis furnished for it by handicraft and Manu- 
facture. The increasing size of the prime movers, of the 
transmitting mechanism, and of the machines proper, the 
greater complication, multiformity and regularity of the details 
of these machines, as they more and more departed from the 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 379 

model of those originally made by manual labour, and acquired 
a form, untrammelled except by the conditions under which 
they worked, 1 the perfecting of the automatic system, and the 
use, every day more unavoidable, of a more refractory material, 
such as iron instead of wood — the solution of all these problems, 
which sprang up by the force of circumstances, everywhere 
met with a stumbling-block in the personal restrictions, which 
even the collective labourer of Manufacture could not break 
through, except to a limited extent. Such machines as the 
modern hydraulic press, the modern powerloom, and the modern 
carding engine, could never have been furnished by Manu- 
facture. 

A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of 
industry involves a similar change in other spheres. This 
happens at first in such branches of industry as are conne* 
together by being separate phases of a process, and yet are 
isolated by the social division of labour, in such a way, that 
each of them produces an independent commodity. Thus 
spinning by machinery made weaving by machinery a necessity, 
and both together made the mechanical and chemical revolu- 
tion that took place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing, impera- 
tive. So too, on the other hand, the revolution in eotton- 
Bpinning called forth the invention of the gin, for separating 
the seeds from the cotton fibre ; it was only by means of this 
invention, that the production of cotton beeame possible on the 
enormous scale at present required. 1 But more especially, the 

1 Th< powerloom was at first made chiefly of wood ; in its improved modem form 
it is made of iron. To what an extent the old forms of the instrument! of production 
influenced their new forms at first starting, is ihown by, amongst other tl 

nperficial comparison of the preseul powerloom with the old one, of the modem 
blowing apparatus of ■ blast-furnace with the first Inefficient mechanical reprodu 
of the ordinary bellows, and perhapi more itrikinglj than in any other way. bj 
att> mpta before the invention of the pn * nt locomotive, to construct • locon 
that actually had two feet, which after the fashion of a horse, ii raised alternately 
from and. It is only after considerable development of the n 

mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, thai the form ofamachin< 
comei ettled entirely in accordance with mechanical principles, snd emancipated 
from the traditional form of the tool that ga i it. 

• BU Wniti 'ii had until ret] times undergone 

Othei machine of the |£tfl ivhIiim It [s only dmii: 

thai anothei American, Mi E iery, of Albenj fork, 

Whitney's .in antiquated by an Improvement is limple as it is 
affective 



3 So Capitalist Production. 

revolution in the modes of production of industry and agricul- 
ture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of 
the social process of production, i.e., in the means of communi- 
cation and of transport. In a society whose pivot, to use an 
expression of Fourier, was agriculture on a small scale, with its 
subsidiary domestic industries, and the urban handicrafts, the 
means of communication and transport were so utterly inade- 
quate to the productive requirements of the manufacturing 
period, with its extended division of social labour, its concen- 
tration of the instruments of labour, and of the workmen, and 
its colonial markets, that they became in fact revolutionised. 
\n. the same way the means of communication and transport 
handed down from the manufacturing period soon became un- 
bearable trammels on Modern Industry, with its feverish haste 
of production, its enormous extent, its constant flinging of 
capital and labour from one sphere of production into another, 
and its newly-created connexions with the markets of the 
whole world. Hence, apart from the radical changes intro- 
duced in the construction of sailing vessels, the means of 
communication and transport became gradually adapted to the 
modes of production of mechanical industry, by the creation of 
a system of river steamers, railways, ocean steamers, and 
telegraphs. But the huge masses of iron that had now to be 
forged, to be welded, to be cut, to be bored, and to be shaped, 
demanded, on their part, cyclopean machines, for the construc- 
tion of which the methods of the manufacturing period were 
utterly inadequate. 

Modern Industry had therefore itself to take in hand the 
machine, its characteristic instrument of production, and to 
construct machines bv machines. It was not till it did this, 
that it built up for itself a fitting technical foundation, and 
stood on its own feet. Machinery, simultaneously with the 
increasing use of it, in the first decades of this century, appro- 
priated, by degrees, the fabrication of machines proper. But 
it was only during the decade preceding 18G6, that the con- 
struction of railways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale 
called into existence the cyclopean machines now employed in 
the construction of prime movers. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 3S1 

The most essential condition to the production of machines 
by machines was a prime mover capable of exerting any 
amount of force, and yet under perfect control. Such a con- 
dition was already supplied by the steam-engine. But at the 
same time it was necessary to produce the geometrically accu- 
rate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders, cones, and spheres, 
required in the detail parts of the machines. This problem 
Henry Maudsley solved in the first decade of this century by 
the invention of the slide rest, a tool that was soon made 
automatic, and in a modified form was applied to other con- 
structive machines besides the lathe, for which it was originally 
intended. This mechanical appliance replaces, not some par- 
ticular tool, but the hand itself, which produces a given form 
by holding and guiding the cutting tool along the iron or other 
material operated upon. Thus it became possible to produce 
the forms of the individual parts of machinery " with a degree 
of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated experience of 
the hand of the most skilled workman could give." l 

If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery 
employed in the construction of machines, which constitutes 
the operating tool, we find the manual implements reappearing, 
but on a cyclopean scale. The operating part of the boring 
machine is an immense drill driven by a steam-engine; with- 
out this machine, on the other hand, the cylinders of large 
steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made. The 
mechanical lathe is only a cyclopean reproduction of the 
ordinary foot-lathe ; the planing machine, an iron carpenter, 
that works on iron with the same tools that the human car- 
penter employs on wood j the instrument that, on the London 
wharves, cuts the veneers, is a gigantic razor; the tool of the 
shearing machine, which shears iron as easily as a tailor's 
ors cut cloth, is a monster pair of Bcissors; and the 
Bteam hammer works with an ordinary hammer head, hut of 

1 "Tin- [nduttryof Nation*, Lond., 1856," Part n.. p. 289. Tbta worl alec 
in. 11 k:< : " Simple and outwardly unimportant as this app 1 : • it, 

It IS lint, W In ||, \,., ,i\. Ml!, • In.) H.ucli to Mjltc, tll.lt its i II t! 1 1 r 1 1 (f ill 1III|'I' 

ding the um of machinery dm been as gre a t us thai produced bj VI 
|>rovementa of the steam-engine iteelf. it- Introduction erenl 
machinery, to cheap n it, and to itimulatc Invention mul ixuprorenv at." 



382 Capitalist Production. 

such a weight that not Thor himself could wield it. : These 
steam hammers are an invention of Nasmyth, and there is one 
that weighs over G tons and strikes with a vertical fall of 7 
feet, on an anvil weighing 36 tons. It is mere child's-play for 
it to crush a block of granite into powder, yet it is no less 
capable of driving, with a succession of Light taps, a nail into a 
piece of soft wood. 2 

The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessi- 
tate the substitution of natural forces for human force, and 
the conscious application of science, instead of rule of thumb. 
In Manufacture, the organisation of the social labour-process is 
purely subjective ; it is a combination of detail labourers ; in its 
machinery system, Modern Industry has a productive organism 
that is purely objective, in which the labourer becomes a mere 
appendage to an already existing material condition of pro- 
duction. In simple co-operation, and even in that founded on 
division of labour, the suppression of the isolated, by the 
collective, workman still appears to be more or less accidental. 
Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, oper- 
ates only by means of associated labour, or labour in common. 
Hence the co-operative character of the labour-process is, in 
the latter case, a technical necessity dictated by the instrument 
of labour itself. 



SECTION 2. — THE VALUE TRANSFERRED BY MACHINERY TO THE PRODUCT. 

We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-opera- 
tion and division of labour cost capital nothing. They are 
natural forces of social labour. So also physical forces, like 
steam, water, &c., when appropriated to productive processes, 
cost nothing. But just as a man requires lungs to breathe with, 
so he requires something that is work of man's hand, in order 
to consume physical forces productively. A water-wheel is 
necessary to exploit the force of water, and a steam engine to 

1 One of these machines, used for forging paddle-wheel shafts in London, is called 
"Thor." It forges a shaft of 16J tons with as much ease as a blacksmith forges a 
horse-shoe. 

» Wood working machines that are also capable of being employed on a small scale 
are mostly American inventions. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 383 

exploit the elasticity of steam. Once discovered, the law of 
the deviation of the magnetic needle in the field of an electric 
current, or the law of the magnetisation of iron, around which 
an electric current circulates, cost never a penny. 1 But the 
exploitation of these laws for the purposes of telegraphy, &c, 
necessitates a costly and extensive apparatus. The tool, as we 
have seen, is not exterminated by the machine. From being a 
dwarf implement of the human organism, it expands and mul- 
tiplies into the implement of a mechanism created by man. 
Capital now sets the labourer to work, not with a manual tool, 
but with a machine which itself handles the tools. Although, 
therefore, it is clear at the first glance that, by incorporating 
both stupendous physical forces, and the natural sciences, with 
the process of production, Modern Industry raises the produc- 
tiveness of labour to an extraordinary degree, it is by no means 
equally clear, that this increased productive force is not, on 
the other hand, purchased by an increased expenditure of 
labour. Machinery, like every other component of constant 
capital, creates no new value, but yields up its own value to 
the product that it serves to beget. In so far as the machine 
has value, and, in consequence, parts with value to the product, 
it forms an element in the value of that product. Instead of 
being cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to 
the value of the machine. And it is clear as noon-day, that 
machines and systems of machinery, the characteristic instru- 
ments of labour of Modern Industry, are incomparably more 
leaded with value than the implements used in handicrafts 
and manufactures. 

In the iirst place, it must be observed that the machinery, 
while always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters 
into the value-begetting process only by bits. It never adds more 
value than it Loses, on an average, by wear and tear. Hence th. re 

Science, gem rally s] »«:iki 1 tin- capitalist nothing, ;i fa < ■ t that by no m< 

hinderi him from exploiting it. The science <>i othen la as moon annexed by capital 
ai the labour «>f othen. Capitalistic appropriation ■* i n < 1 personal appropriation, 
whether of 14 i< ace <>r of matei Ial wraith, are, hower er, totally different thin p. I h • 
ure himself deplorei the gross Ignoranoe <>f mechanical loience existing amoi 
•if, u machinery-exploiting manufacturers, and Liebig fan a tale unf<»l<l about 
inding Ignorance of chemistry displayed by English chemical manufaott 



384 Capitalist Production. 

is a great difference between the value of a machine, and the vain* 
transferred in a given time by that machine to the product. The 
longer the life of the machine in the labour-process, the greater is 
that difference. It is true, no doubt, as we have already seen, 
that every instrument of labour enters as a whole into the 
labour-process, and only piece-meal, proportionally to its aver- 
age daily loss by wear and tear, into the value-begetting pro- 
cess. But this difference between the instrument as a whole 
and its daily wear and tear, is much greater in a machine than 
in a tool, because the machine, bein<x made from more durable 
material, has a longer life ; because its employment, being 
regulated by strictly scientific laws, allows of greater economy 
in the wear and tear of its parts, and in the materials it con- 
sumes ; and lastly, because its field of production is incom- 
parably larger than that of a tool. After making allowance, 
both in the case of the machine and of the tool, for their 
average daily cost, that is for the value they transmit to the 
product by their average daily wear and tear, and for their 
consumption of auxiliary substances, such as oil, coal, and so 
on, they each do their work gratuitously, just like the forces 
furnished by nature without the help of man. The greater 
the productive power of the machinery compared with that of 
the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous service com- 
pared with that of the tool. In Modern Industry man suc- 
ceeded for the first time in making the product of his past 
labour work on a large scale gratuitously, like the forces of 
nature. 1 

In treating of Co-operation and ^Manufacture, it was shown 
that certain general factors of production, such as buildings, 

1 Ricardo lays such stressor) this effect of machinery (of which, in other connexions, 
he takes no more notice than he does of the general distinction between the labour- 
process and the process of creating surplus-value), that he occasionally loses sight of 
the value given up by machines to the product, and puts machines on the same foot" 
ing as natural forces. Thus "Adam Smith nowhere undervalues the services which 
the natural agents and machinery perform for us, but he very justly distinguisheu 
the nature of the value which they add to commodities ... as they perform 
their work gratuitously, the assistance which they afford us, adds nothing to value 
in exchange." (Rio. 1. c, p. 836, 337.) This observation of Kicardo is of course 
correct in so far as it is directed against J. B. Say, who imagines that machines 
render the "service " of creating value which forms a part of "profits." 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 385 

are, in comparison with the scattered means of production of 
the isolated workman, economised by being consumed in com- 
mon, and that they therefore make the product cheaper. In a 
system of machinery, not only is the framework of the machine 
consumed in common by its numerous operating implements, 
but the prime mover, together with a part of the transmitting 
mechanism, is consumed in common by the numerous operative 
machines. 

Given the difference between the value of the machinery, 
and the value transferred by it in a day to the product, the 
extent to which this latter value makes the product dearer, 
depends in the first instance, upon the size of the product ; so 
to say, upon its area. Mr. Baynes, of Blackburn, in a lecture 
published in 1858, estimates that " each real mechanical horse- 
power 1 will drive 450 self-acting mule spindles, with pre- 
paration, or 200 throstle spindles, or 15 looms for 40 inch 
cloth with the appliances for warping, sizing, &c." In the 
first case, it is the day's produce of 450 mule spindles, in 
the second, of 200 throstle spindles, in the third, of 15 power- 
looms, over which the daily cost of one horse-power, and the 
wear and tear of the machinery set in motion by that power, 
are spread ; so that only a very minute value is transferred by 
such wear and tear to a pound of yarn or a yard of cloth. The 

1 A horse -]>ower is equal to a force of 33,000 footpounds per minute, i.e., to a f 
that raises 38,000 pounds one foot in a minute, or one pound 33,000 feet. This is 
the horse-power meant in the text. Inordinary language, and also heie and i 

in quotation! in this work, a distinction is drawn between the "nominal "ami the 
" Commercial " or " indicated " horse-power of the same engine. The old or nominal 
powei is calculated exclusively from the length of piston-stroke, and the 
diameb i oi th< cylinder, and leaves preeenre of steam and piston spied oat of oon- 
lideration. It expreceei practioallj tins: This engine would be one of 60 fa 
power, if it were driven witli the same low pressure of steam, and the same ftlo* 

piston ipeed, as In the days of Boulton and Watt. But the two lattei hv I an bavs 
enormously since those days. In order to measure the mechanical fonx 

ted i" day by an engine, sn Indicator bai been Invented which shows the pressors 
of the ■team In the cylinder. The piston ipeed is easily ascertained. Tims the 
"indicated " or "commercial" boree*po wet of an engine hi expressed by ;i maths 

cal formula, Involving diameter of cylinder, length of stroke, piston ipeed, and 
st. ;n 1 1 pn multaneoosly, and showing what multiple of 83,000 pounds Is really 

d by the engine In a minute. Henoe, ona *' nominal * hocse-powt 

e, four, oi even five "indicated 'oi " real * h or s e p owe rs . This obeervatioo Is 
in.nl. for the p u rpose of explaining rarions otcntloM in the sabeequeai 
('I'll.- editor.) 

2 B 



386 Capitalist Production. 

same is the ease with the steam-hammer mentioned above. 
Since its daily wear and tear, its coal-consumption, &c., are 
spread over the stupendous masses of iron hammered by it in 
a day, only a small value is added to a hundredweight of iron ; 
but that value would be very great, if the cyclopean instrument 
were employed in driving in nails. 

Given a machine's capacity for work, that is, the number of 
its operating tools, or, where it is a question of force, their 
mass, the amount of its product will depend on the velocity of 
its working parts, on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or 
on the number of blows given by the hammer in a minute. 
Many of these colossal hammers strike seventy times in a 
minute, and Ryder's patent machine for forging spindles with 
small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute. 

Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the 
product, the amount of value so transferred depends on the 
total value of the machinery. 1 The less labour it contains, the 
less value it imparts to the product. The less value it gives 
up, so much the more productive it is, and so much the more 
its services approximate to those of natural forces. But the 
production of machinery by machinery lessens its value 
relatively to its extension and efficacy. 

An analysis and comparison of the prices of commodities 
produced by handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of 
the same commodities produced by machinery, shows generally, 
that, in the product of machinery, the value due to the instru- 
ments of labour increases relatively, but decreases absolutely. 
In other words, its absolute amount decreases, but its amount, 
relatively to the total value of the product, of a pound of yarn, 
for instance, increases. 

1 The reader who is imbued with capitalist notions will naturally miss here the 
" interest " that the machine, in proportion to its capital value, adds to the product. 
It is, however, easily seen that since a machine no more creates new value than any 
other part of constant capital, it cannot add any value under the name of "interest." 
It is also evident that here, where we are treating of the production of surplus value, 
we cannot assume a priori the existence of any part of that value under the name of 
interest. The capitalist mode of calculating, which appears, primd facie, absurd, 
and repugnant to the laws of the creation of value, will be explained in the third 
book of this work. 

2 This portion of value which is added by the machinery, decreases both absolutely 
and relatively, when the machinery does away with horses and other animals that 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 387 

It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to pro- 
duce a machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, 
there is nothing but a transposition of labour; consequently 
the total labour required to produce a commodity is not 
lessened or the productiveness of labour is not increased. It 
is clear, however, that the difference between the labour a 
machine costs, and the labour it saves, in other words, that the 
degree of its productiveness does not depend on the difference 
between its own value and the value of the implement it re- 
places. As long as the labour spent on a machine, and conse- 
quently the portion of its value added to the product, remains 
smaller than the value added by the workman to the product 
with his tool, there is always a difference of labour saved in 
favour of the machine. The productiveness of a machine is 
therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces. 
According to Mr. Baynes, 2£ operatives are required for the 450 
mule spindles, inclusive of preparation machinery, 1 that are 

are employed as mere moving forces, and not as machines for changing the form of 
matter. It may here be incidentally observed, that Descartes, in defining animal- as 
mere machines, saw with eyes of the manufacturing period, while to eyes of the 
middle ftges, animals were assistants to man, as they were later to Von Haller in his 
" Kestauration der Staatswissenschaften." That Descartes, like Bacon, anticipated 
an alteration in the form of production, and the practical subjugation of Nature by 
Man, as a result of the altered methods of thought, is plain from his "Discoun de 
l.i Methode." He there says: "II est possible (by the methods he introduced in 
philosophy) de parvenir a des connaissances fort utiles a la vie, et qu'au lien de oette 
philosophic speculative qu'on enseigne dans les ecoles, on en petit trouver une 
pratique par laquelle, connaissant la force et les actions da feu, de I'eau, de fair, d< i 
astres, et de tons les autres corps qui nous environnent, aussi distinctenn int que nous 
•onnaisfiona les divers metiers de nos artisans, nous les pourrious employer en meme 
ticon a tons hs usages auxquels ils sont proprei, et ainsi nous rendre oomme maltres 
<-t possesseuri de la nature " and thus " contribuer an perfectionnement de la vie 
bnmaine. " In the preftt e to Sir Dudley North's " Discourses upon Trade '' (1691 ) it 

is Kt;itc«l, that I >■ •< .-iites' method had began to free political economy from the <>M 
fjablea and superstitious notions of gold, trade, <kc. On the whole, however, the 
early English economists tided with Bacon and Robbes as their philosophers; while, 
at i later pei iod, the philosopher »ar' K£#x«« °f political i oonomy in England, Fran* . 

and Italy, was Loci B. 

1 Acoording to the annual report (1863) of the Besen chamber of commerce, there 
was produced In L862, at the cast-steel works of Erupp, with Lis i'»i furnaces, thirt) 

two iteam engines (in the year 1S(K) this was about the numl» i of all th<- it) 

engines working in Manchester), and fourteen steam hammed (representing b 
1236 borse power), forty-nine forges, 208 tool machines, and about '-'i (N ' workmen 
thirteen million pounds of east ptasL Hers there an not two wurkmu 

horse power. 



3 8 I Capitalist Production. 

driven by one-horse power; each self-acting mule spindle, 
working ten hours, produces 13 ounces of yarn (average numbei 
or thickness); consequently 2^ operatives spin weekly 365f lbs. 
of yarn. Hence, leaving waste on one side, 366 lbs. of cotton 
absorb, during their conversion into yarn, only 150 hours' 
labour, or fifteen days' labour of ten hours each. But with a 
spinning-wheel, supposing the hand-spinner to produce thirteen 
ounces of yarn in sixty hours, the same weight of cotton would 
absorb 2700 days' labour of ten hours each, or 27,000 hours' 
labour. 1 Where block-printing, the old method of printing 
calico by hand, has been superseded by machine printing, a 
single machine prints, with the aid of one man or boy, as much 
calico of four colours in one hour, as it former! j r took 200 men 
to do.. 2 Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton-gin in 1793, 
the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an 
average day's labour. By means of his invention one negress 
was enabled to clean 100 lbs. daily ; and since then, the 
efficacy of the gin has been considerably increased. A pound 
of cotton wool, previously costing 50 cents to produce, included 
after that invention more unpaid labour, and was consequently 
sold with greater profit, at 10 cents. In India they employ for 
separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half machine, 
half tool, called a churka; with this one man and a woman can 
clean 28 lbs. daily. With the churka invented some years ago 
by Dr. Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lbs. daily. If 
oxen, steam, or water, be used for driving it, only a few boys 
and girls as feeders are required. Sixteen of these machines 
driven by oxen do as much work in a day as formerly 750 
people did on an average. 3 

A.s already stated, a steam-plough does as much work in one 
hour at a cost of threepence, as 66 men at a cost of 15 shillings. 
I return to this example in order to clear up an erroneous 

1 Babbage estimates that in Java the spinning labour alone adds 117 % to the value 
of the cotton. At the same period (1832) the total value added to the cotton by 
machinery and labour in the fine-spinning industry, amounted to about 33 % of the 
value of the cotton. (" On the Economy of Machinery," p. 214.) 

... Machine printing also economises colour. 

., S«« p»pet read by Dr. Watson. Reporter on Products to the Government of 
India, before the Society of Arts, 17th April, 1SG0. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 389 

notion. The 15 shillings are by no means the expression in 
money of all the labour expended in one hour by the GG men. 
If the ratio of surplus labour to necessary labour were 100% 
these 66 men would produce in one hour a value of 30 shillings, 
although their wages, 15 shillings, represent only their labour 
for half an hour. Suppose, then, a machine cost as much a.i 
the wages for a year of the 150 men it displaces, say £3000 ; 
this £3000 is by no means the expression in money of the 
labour added to the object produced by these 150 men before the 
introduction of the machine, but only of that portion of their 
year's labour which was expended lor themselves and repre- 
sented by their wages. On the other hand, the £3000, the 
money value of the machine, expresses all the labour expended 
on its production, no matter in what proportion this labour 
constitutes wages for the workman, and surplus-value for the 
capitalist. Therefore, though a machine cost as much as the 
!;il)our-power displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised 
in it is even then much less than the living labour it replaces. 1 
The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapen- 
ing the product, is limited in this way, that less labour must 
be expended in producing the machinery than is displaced by 
the employment of that machinery. For the capitalist, how- 
ever, this use is still more limited. Instead of paying for the 
labour, he only pays the vylue of the labour-power employed ; 
therefore, the limit to his using 1 machine is fixed bv the 
difference between the value of the machine and the value of 
the labour-power replaced by it. Since the division of tin; 
day's work into necessary and surplus-labour differs in diflfl r- 
ent countries, and even in the same country at different 
periods, or in different branches of industry; and further, since 
the actual wage of the labourer at one time sinks below the 
value of his labour-power, at another rises above it, it is possible 

for tin; difference between the price of the machinery and the 

price of the labour-power replaced by that machinery to \ 

v<:iy much, although the difference between the quantity 

1 " Th6M mute agentn (flMohintt] IN llwftjl Um prodnoi <>f him. : i lea Ubooi than 

th.-it wliiih tlirv (liMj.htce, oven when tlu-y ;ire of tin- MMM m<>n< y fftlu 
J. c.,p. 10.) 



390 Capitalist Production. 

labour requisite to produce the machine and the total quantity 
replaced by it, remain constant. 1 But it is the former differ- 
ence alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of produc- 
ing a commodity, and, through the pressure of competition, 
influences his action. Hence the invention now-a-days of 
machines in England that are employed only in North America ; 
just as in the sixteenth and seventeeth centuries, machines 
were invented in Germany to be used only in Holland, and 
just as many a French invention of the eighteenth century was 
exploited in England alone. In the older countries, machinery, 
when employed in some branches of industry, creates such a 
redundancy of labour in other branches that in these latter 
the fall of wages below the value of labour-power impedes the 
use of machinery, and, from the standpoint of the capitalist, 
whose profit comes, not from a diminution of the labour em- 
ployed, but of the labour paid for, renders that use superfluous 
and often impossible. In some branches of the woollen manu- 
facture in England the employment of children has during 
recent years been considerably diminished, and in some cases 
has been entirely abolished. Why? Because the Factory Acts 
made two sets of children necessary, one working six hours, the 
other four, or each working five hours. But the parents refused 
to sell the "half-timers" cheaper than the "full-timers." Hence 
the substitution of machinery for the "half-timers." 2 Before the 
labour of women and of children under 10 years of age was 
forbidden in mines, capitalists considered the employment 
of naked women and girls, often in company with men, so far 
sanctioned by their moral code, and especially by their ledgers, 
that it was only after the passing of the Act that they had re- 

1 Hence in a communistic society there would be a very different scope for the em- 
ployment of machinery than there can be in a bourgeois society. 

2 " Employers of labour would not unnecess irily retain two sets of children under 
thirteen. ... In fact one class of manufacturers, the spinners of woollen yarn, 
now rarely employ children under thirteen years of age, i.e., half-timers. They have 
introduced improved and new machinery of various kinds, which altogether supersedes 
the employment of children (i.e., under 13 years) ; f.i., I will mention one process aa 
nn illustration of this diminution in the number of children, wherein by the addition 
of an apparatus, called a piecing machine, to existing machines, the work of six or 
four half-times, according to the peculiarity of each machine, can be performed by 
one young person (over 13 years) . . . the half-time system 'stimulated' the 
invention of the piecing machine." (Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct.. 185S.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 391 

course to machinery. The Yankees have invented a stone- 
breaking machine. The English do not make use of it, because 
the " wretch ni who does this work gets paid for such a small 
portion of his labour, that machinery would increase the cost 
of production to the capitalist. 2 In England women are still 
occasionally used instead of horses for hauling canal boats,* be- 
cause the labour required to produce horses and machines is 
an accurately known quantity, while that required to maintain 
the women of the surplus population is below all calculation. 
Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful squandering of 
human labour-power for the most despicable purposes than in 
England, the land of machinery. 

8ECTION 3. — THE PROXIMATE EFFECTS OF MACHINERY ON THE WORKMAN'. 

The starting point of Modern Industry is, as we have shown, 
the revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution 
attains its most highly developed form in the organised system of 
machinery in a factory. Before we inquire how human material 
is incorporated with this objective organism, let us consider 
some general effects of this revolution on the labourer himself. 

a. Appropriation of supplementary Labour-power by Capital. 
The Employment of Women and Children. 

In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it 
becomes a means of employing labourers of slight muscular 
strength, and those whose bodily development is incomplete, 
but whose limbs are all the more supple. The labour of 
women and children was, therefore, the first tiling sought for 
by capitalists who used machinery. That mighty substitute 
for labour and labourers was forthwith changed into a means 
for increasing the number of wage-labourers by enrolling, 
under the direct sway of capital, every member of the work- 
man's family, without distinction of ago or sex. Compulsory 
work for the capitalist usurped the place, not only of the 

1 "Wretch" i.s the recognised term in English political economy for theagricultur il 
labourer. 

2 " Machinery . . . can frequently not be employed until labour (bo meuut 
VSfef) riHi'H." (Kicardo, 1. c, p. . r >7!). ) 

* See M Report of the Social Science CougreM, at Edinburgh." Oct., ISi);}. 



39 2 Capitalist Production* 

children's play, but also of free labour at home within 
moderate limits for the support of the family. 1 

The value of labour-power was determined, not only by 
the labour-time necessary to maintain the individual adult 
labourer, but also by that necessary to maintain his family. 
Machinery, by throwing every member of that family on to 
the labour market, spreads the value of the man's labour- 
power over his whole family. It thus depreciates his labour- 
power. To purchase the labour-power of a family of four 
workers may, perhaps, cost more than it formerly did to 
purchase the labour-power of the head of the family, but, in 
return, four days' labour takes the place of one, and their price 
falls in proportion to the excess of the surplus-labour of 
four over the surplus-labour of one. In order that the family 
may live, four people must now, not only labour, but expend 
surplus-labour for the capitalist. Thus we see, that machinery, 
while augmenting the human material that forms the principal 
object of capital's exploiting power, 2 at the same time raises 
the degree of exploitation. 

1 Dr. Edward Smith, during the cotton crisis caused by the American Civil War, 
was sent by the English Government to Lancashire, Cheshire, and other places, to 
report on the sanitary condition of the cotton operatives. He reported, that from 
a hygienic point of view, and apart from the banishment of the operatives from the 
factory atmosphere, the crisis had several advantages. The women now had sufficient 
leisure to give their infants the breast, instead of poisoning them with " Godfrey : s 
cordial." They had time to learn to cook. Unfortunately the acquisition of this 
art occurred at a time when they had nothing to cook. But from this we see how 
capital, for the purposes of its self-expansion, has usurped the labour necessary in 
the home of the family. This crisis was also utilised to teach sewing to the 
daughters of the workmen in sewing schools. An American revolution and a univer- 
sal crisis, in order that the working girls, who spin for the whole world, might learn 
to sew ! 

2 " The numerical increase of labourers has been great, through the growing substi- 
tution of female for male, and above all, of childish for adult labour. Three girls 
of 13, at wages of from 6 shillings to 8 shillings a week, have replaced the one man 
of mature age, of wages varying from 18 shillings to 45 shillings." (Th. de Quincey : 
"The Logic of Political Econ., London, 1845." Note to p. 147.) Since certain family 
functions, such as nursing and suckling children, cannot be entirely suppressed, the 
mothers confiscated by capital, must try substitutes of some sort. Domestic work, 
such as sewing and mending, must be replaced by the purchase of ready-made 
articles. Hence, the diminished expenditure of labour in the house is accompanied 
by an increased expenditure of money. The cost of keeping the family increases, 
and balances the greater income. In addition to this, economy and judgment 
in the consumption and preparation of themeans of subsistence becomes impossible. 
Abundant material relating to these facts, which are concealed by official political 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 393 

Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract be- 
tween the labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their 
mutual relations. Taking the exchange of commodities as our 
basis, our first assumption was that capitalist and labourer met 
as free persons, as independent owners of commodities ; the one 
possessing money and means of production, the other labour- 
power. But now the capitalist buys children and young 
persons under age. Previously, the workman sold his own 
labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent. 
Now he sells wife and child. He has become a slave dealer. 1 
The demand for children's labour often resembles in form the 
inquiries for negro slaves, such as were formerly to be read 
among the advertisements in American journals. " My at- 
tention," says an English factory inspector, " was drawn to an 
advertisement in the local paper of one of the most important 
manufacturing towns of my district, of which the following is 
a copy : Wanted, 12 to 20 young persons, not younger than 
what can pass for 13 years. Wages, 4 shillings a week. 
Apply &c," 2 The phrase " what can pass for 13 years," has 
reference to the fact, that by the Factory Act, children under 
13 years may work only 6 hours. A surgeon officially ap- 
pointed must certify their age. The manufacturer, therefore, 
asks for children who look as if they were already 13 years 
old. The decrease, often by leaps and bounds in the number 
of children under 13 years employed in factories, a decrease 

economy, is to be found in the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories, of the 
Children's Employment Commission, and more especially in the Reports on Public 
Health. 

1 In striking contrast with the great fact, that the shortening of the hours of labour 
of women and children in English factories was exacted from capital by the male 
operatives, we find in the latest reports of the Children's Employment Commission 
traits of the operative parents in relation to the traffic in children, that are truly re- 
volting and thoroughly like slave-dealing. But the Pharisee of a capitalist, as may 
be seen from the same reports, denounces this brutality which he himself OH 
perpetuates, and exploits, and which he moreover baptises "Freedom of labour." 
"Infant labour has been called into aid . . . even to work for their own daily bread. 
Without strength to endure such disproportionate toil, without instruction to guide 
their future life, they have been thrown into a situation physically and morally pol- 
luted. The Jewish historian has remarked upon the overthrow of Jerusalem by 
that it was no wonder it should have been destroyed, with such a lignal destruction, 
when an inhuman mother sacrificed her own offspring to satisfy the cravin 
absolute hunger." (" Puhlic Economy Concentrated." Carlisle, L888, p. •""»'•• ) 

a A. Redgrave la " Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, L858," pp. 40, 11. 



394 Capitalist Production. 

that is shown in an astonishing manner by the English statistics 
of the last 20 years, was for the most part, according to the 
evidence of the factory inspectors themselves, the work of the 
certifying surgeons, who overstated the age of the children, 
agreeably to the capitalist's greed for exploitation, and the 
sordid trafficking needs of the parents. In the notorious district 
of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every Monday and 
Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes from 9 years of 
atre upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufacturers. 
" The usual terms are Is. Sd. a week (this belongs to the 
parents) and ' 2d. for myself and tea.' The contract is binding 
only for the week. The scene and language while this 
market is going on are quite disgraceful." x It has also occurred 
in England, that women have taken " children from the work- 
house and let any one have them out for 2s. Gd. a week." 2 In 
spite of legislation, the number of boys sold in Great Britain 
by their parents to act as live chimney-sweeping machines 
(although there exist plenty of machines to replace them) ex- 
ceeds 2000. 3 The revolution effected by machinery in the 
juridical relations between the buyer and the seller of labour- 
power, causing the transaction as a whole to lose the appearance 
of a contract between free persons, afforded the English 
Parliament an excuse, founded on juridical principles, for the 
interference of the state with factories. Whenever the law 
limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries not before 
interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are always 
renewed. They allege that numbers of the parents withdraw 
their children from the industry brought under the Act, in order 
to sell them where " freedom of labour " still rules, i.e., where 
children under 13 years are compelled to work like grown-up 
people, and therefore can be got rid of at a higher price. But 
since capital is by nature a leveller, since it exacts in every 
sphere of production equality in the conditions of the ex- 
ploitation of labour, the limitation by law of children's labour, 
in one branch of industry, becomes the cause of its limitation 
in others. 

1 Children's Employment Commission, Fifth Report, London, 1866, p. 81, n. 31. 

2 Children's Employment Commission, Third Report, London, 1S64, p. 53, n. 15. 
>U, Fifth Keport, p. 22, n. 137. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 395 

We have already alluded to the physical deterioration as 
well of the children and young persons as of the women, whom 
machinery, first directly in the factories that shoot up on its 
basis, and then indirectly in all the remaining branches of in- 
dustry, subjects to the exploitation of capital. In this place, 
therefore, we dwell only on one point, the enormous mortality, 
during the first few years of their life, of the children of the 
operatives. In sixteen of the registration districts into which 
England is divided, there are, for every 100,000 children alive 
under the age of one year, only 9000 deaths in a year on an 
average (in one district only 7047) ; in 24 districts the deaths 
are over 10,000, but under 11,000 ; in 39 districts, over 11,000, 
but under 12,000; in 48 districts over 12,000, but under 13,000; 
in 22 districts over 20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000 ; in 17 
over 22,000; in 11 over 23,000; in Hoo, Wolverhampton, 
Ashton-under-Lyne, and Preston, over 24,000 ; in Nottingham, 
Stockport, and Bradford, over 25,000 ; in Wisbeach, 2G,000 ; and 
in Manchester, 2GJ125. 1 As was shown by an official medical 
inquiry in the year 18G1, the high death-rates are, apart from 
local causes, principally due to the employment of the mothers 
away from their homes, and to the neglect and maltreatment 
consequent on her absence, such as, amongst others, insufficient 
nourishment, unsuitable food, and dosing with opiates ; besides 
this, there arises an unnatural estrangement between mother 
and child, and as a consequence intentional starving and 
poisoning of the children. 2 In those agricultural districts, 
" where a minimum in the employment of women exists, the 
death-rate is on the other hand very low." 3 The Inquiry-Com- 
mission of 18G1 led, however, to the unexpected result, that in 
some purely agricultural districts bordering on the North Sea, 
the death-rate of children under one year old almost equalled 
that of the worst factory districts. Dr. Julian Hunter was 
therefore commissioned to investigate this phenomenon on the 

I Sixth Report on Public Health. Lond., 1864, p. 34. 

3 " It (the Inquiry of 1801) . . . showed, moreover, that while, with the <1< M 
circumstances, infants perish under the neglect and mitlDMMgl IBM nt whi.h tin ir 
mothers' occupations imply, the mothers hecomo to a grievous txtent denftturt 
towards tlu-ir offspring — commonly not troubling themselves much at the d« \ith. 
even sometimes . . . taking direct measures to insure it." (1. e.) 

3 I. c, p. 164, 



396 Capitalist Production. 

spot. His report is incorporated with the " Sixth Report on 
Public Health.'' 1 Up to that time it was supposed, that the 
children were decimated by malaria, and other diseases peculiar 
to low-lying and marshy districts. But the inquiry showed 
the very opposite, namely, that the same cause which drove 
away malaria, the conversion of the land, from a morass in 
winter and a scanty pasture in summer, into fruitful corn land, 
created the exceptional death-rate of the infants. 2 The 70 
medical men, whom Dr. Hunter examined in that district, were 
" wonderfully in accord " on this point. In fact, the revolution 
in the mode of cultivation had led to the introduction of the 
industrial system. Married women, who work in gangs along 
with boys and girls, are, for a stipulated sum of money, placed 
at the disposal of the farmer, by a man called the "undertaker," 
who contracts for the whole gangr " These gangs will some- 
times travel many miles from their own village ; they are to 
be met morning and evening on the roads, dressed in short 
petticoats, with suitable coats and boots, and sometimes 
trousers, looking wonderfully strong and healthy, but tainted 
with a customary immorality, and heedless of the fatal results 
Avhich their love of this busy and independent life is bringing 
on their unfortunate offspring who are pining at home." 3 Every 
phenomenon of the iactory districts is here reproduced, includ- 
ing, but to a greater extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and dosing 
children with opiates. 4 " My knowledge of such evils," says 
Dr. Simon, the medical officer of the Privy Council and editor 
in chief of the Reports on Public Health, " may excuse the pro- 
found misgiving with which I regard any large industrial em- 
ployment of adult women." 5 "Happy indeed," exclaims Mr. 
Baker, the factory inspector, in his official report, " happy in- 

1 1. c, p. 454-4G3. " Keport by Dr. Henry Julian Hunter on the excessive mor- 
tality of infants in some rural districts of England." 
2 1. c, p. 35 and pp. 455, 45G. 

3 1. c. , p. 456. 

4 In the agricultural as well as in the factory districts the consumption of opium 
among the grown-up labourers, both male and female, is extending daily. "To 
push the sale of opiate .... is the great aim of some enterprising wholesale mer- 
chants. By druggists it is considered the leading article." (1. c, p. 459.) Infants 
that take opiates " shrank up into little old men," or " wizzened like little monkeys," 
(1. c, p. 400). We here see how India and China avenged themselves on England. 

s 1. c, p. 37 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 397 

deed will it be for the manufacturing districts of England, 
when every married woman having a family is prohibited 
from working in any textile works at all." 1 

The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploita- 
tion of women and children has been so exhaustively depicted 
by F. Engels in his " Lage der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands," 
and other writers, that I need only mention the subject in this 
place. But the intellectual desolation, artifically produced by 
converting immature human beings into mere machines for the 
fabrication of surplus-value, a state of mind clearly dis- 
tinguishable from that natural ignorance which keeps the 
mind fallow without destroying its capacity for development, 
its natural fertility, this desolation finally compelled even the 
English Parliament to make elementary education a com- 
pulsory condition to the "productive" employment of children 
under 14 years, in every industry subject to the Factory Acts. 
The spirit of capitalist production stands out clearly in the 
ludicrous wording of the so-called education clauses in the 
Factory Acts, in the absence of an administrative machiner}-, 
an absence that again makes the compulsion illusory, in the 
opposition of the manufacturers themselves to these education 
clauses, and in the tricks and dodges they put in practice for 
evading them. " For this the legislature is alone to- blame, by 
having passed a delusive law, which, while it would seem to 
provide that the children employed in factories shall be 
educated, contains no enactment by which that professed end 
can be secured. Jt provides nothing more than that the 
children shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain 
number of hours (three) in each day, be inclosed within the 
four walls of a place called a school, and that the employer of 
the child shall receive weekly a certificate to that effect signed 
by a person designated by the subscriber as a schoolmaster <>r 
schoolmistress." Previous to the passing of the amended 
Factory Act, 1844, it happened, not unfrequently, that the 
certificates of attendance at school were signed by the Bchool- 

1 "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 81»t Oct., 1802," p. 59. Mr. Bakei was formerly a 
doctor, 
> Leonard Homer in " Beporti of [nip. of Fact, for .'50th June, L867 t M p. 17. 



398 Capitalist Production. 

master or school mi stress with a cross, as they themselves were 
unable to write. " On one occasion,on visiting a place called a 
school, from which certificates of school attendance had issued, 
I was so struck with the ignorance of the master, that I said 
to him: "Pray, sir, can you read?" His reply was: "Aye, 
summat ! " and as a justification of his right to grant certifi- 
cates, he added : " At any rate, I am before my scholars." The 
inspectors, when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not 
fail to represent the disgraceful state of the places called 
schools, certificates from which they were obliged to admit as 
a compliance with the laws, but they were successful only in 
obtaining thus much, that since the passing of the Act of 1844, 
the figures in the school certificate must be filled up in the 
handwriting of the schoolmaster, who must also sign his 
Christian and surname in full." 1 Sir John Kincaid, factory 
inspector for Scotland, relates experiences of the same kind. 
" The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs. Ann Killin 
Upon asking her to spell her name, she straightway made a 
mistake, by beginning with the letter C, but correcting herself 
immediately, she said her name began with a K. On looking 
at her signature, however, in the school certificate books, I 
noticed that she spelt it in various ways, while her hand- 
writing left no doubt as to her unfitness to teach. She her- 
self also acknowledged that she could not keep the register 
. . . In a second school I found the schoolroom 15 feet 
long, and 10 feet wide, and counted in this space 75 children, 
who were gabbling something unintelligible." 2 " But it is not 
only in the miserable places above referred to that the chil- 
dren obtain certificates of school attendance without having 
received instruction of any value, for in many schools where 
there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail from 
the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 
3 years old and upwards ; his livelihood, miserable at the best, 
depending on the pence received from the greatest number of 
children whom it is possible to cram into the space. To this is 
to be added scanty school furniture, deficiency of books, and 

1 I,. Homer in " Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1855," pp. 18, J 9. 

2 Sir John Kincaid in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1858," pp. 31, 32. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 399 

other materials for teaching, and the depressing effect upon 
the poor children themselves of a close, noisome atmosphere. 
1 have been in many such schools, where I have seen rows of 
children doing absolutely nothing ; and this is certified as 
school attendance, and, in statistical returns, such children are 
set down as being educated." In Scotland the manufacturers 
try all they can to do without the children that are obliged to 
attend school. " It requires no further argument to prove 
that the educational clauses of the Factory Act, being held in 
such disfavour among mill owners, tend in a great measure to 
exclude that class of children alike from the employment and 
the benefit of education contemplated by this Act." 2 Horribly 
grotesque does this appear in print works, which are regulated 
by a special Act. By that Act, " every child, before being em- 
ployed in a print work must have attended school for at least 30 
days, and not less than 150 hours, during the six months immedi- 
ately preceding such first day of employment, and during the 
continuance of its employment in the print works, it must attend 
for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every suc- 
cessive period of six months. . . . The attendance at 
school must be between 8 a.m. and G p.m. No attendance of 
less than 2^ hours, nor more than 5 hours on any one day, 
shall be reckoned as part of the 150 hours. Under ordinary 
circumstances the children attend school morning and after- 
noon for 30 days, for at least 5 hours each day, and upon the 
expiration of the 30 days, the statutory total of 150 hours 
having been attained, having, in their language, made up their 
book, they return to the print work, where they continue 
until flic six months have expired, when another instalment of 
school attendance becomes due, and they again seek the 
school until the book is again made up Many 

boys having attended school for the required Dumber of hours, 
when they return to school after the expiration of their six 
months' work in the print work, are in the same condition afl 
when they first attended school as print-work boys, that they 

have lost all they gained by their previous school attendance. 

1 L llornrr m " Reports, fee., for iiiHt Ooi, 1857,* i>i»- 17, is. 

BL .1. Kn.oml in " Rqx.rtH, ic.,aiht Oct., 1866,' | 



400 Capitalist Production. 

. . . In other print works the children's attendance at 
school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies of the 
work in the establishment. The requisite number of hours is 
made up each six months, by instalments consisting of from 
3 to 5 hours at a time, spreading over, perhaps, the whole six 
,months. . . . For instance, the attendance on one day 
might be from 8 to 11 a.m., on another day from 1 p.m. to 4 
p.m., and the child might not appear at school again for 
several days, when it would attend from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. ; 
then it might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a 
week, then it would not appear in school for 3 weeks or a 
month, after that upon some odd days at some odd hours when 
the operative who employed it chose to spare it ; and thus the 
child was, as it were, buffeted from school to work, from work 
to school, until the tale of 150 hours was told." 1 

By the excessive addition of women and children to the 
ranks of the workers, machinery at last breaks down the re- 
sistance which the male operatives in the manufacturing period 
continued to oppose to the despotism of capital. 2 

b. Prolongation of the working-day. 

If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the 
productiveness of labour — i.e., for shortening the working time 
required in the production of a commodity, it becomes in the 
hands of capital the most powerful means, in those industries 
first invaded by it, for lengthening the working day beyond 

1 A. Redgrave in "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1857, "pp. 41-42. In those in- 
dustries where the Factory Act proper (not the Print Works Act referred to in the 
text) has been in force for some time, the obstacles in the way of the education 
clauses have, in recent years, been overcome. In industries not under the Act, the 
views of Mr. J. Geddes, a glass manufacturer, still extensively prevail. He informed 
Mr. White, one of the Inquiry Commissioners : " As far as I can see, the greater 
amount of education which a part of the working class has enjoyed for some years 
past is an evil. It is dangerous, because it makes them independent.'' (Children's 
Empl. Comm., Fourth Report, Lond., 18G5, p. 253.) 

2 "Mr. E. , a manufacturer .... informed me that he employed females exclusively 
at his power-looms . . . gives a decided preference to married females, especially 
those who have families at home dependent on them for support ; they are atten- 
tive, docile, more so than unmarried females, and are compelled to use their utmost 
exertions to procure the necessaries of life. Thus are the virtues, the peculiar virtues 
of the female character to be perverted to her injury — thus all that is most dutiful 
and tender in her nature is made a means of her bondage and suffering." (Ten Hours' 
Factory Rill. The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. 20 ) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 401 

all bounds set by human nature. It creates, on the one hand, 
new conditions by which capital is enabled to give free scope 
to this its constant tendency, and on the other hand, new 
motives witli which to whet capital's appetite for the labour of 
others. 

In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements 
of labour become automatic, things moving and working inde- 
pendent of the workman. They are thenceforth an industrial 
perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it 
not m^et with certain natural obstructions in the weak bodies 
and the strong wills of its human attendants. The automaton, 
as capital, and because it is capital, is endowed, in the person 
of the capitalist, with intelligence and will ; it is therefore 
animated by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resistance 
offered by that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man. 1 This 
resistance is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of 
machine work, and by the more pliant and docile character of 
the women and children employed on it. 2 

The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely 
proportional to the value transferred by it to the product. 
The longer the life of the machine, the greater is the mass of 
the products over which the value transmitted by the machine 
is spread, and the less is the portion of that value added to 

1 " Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been forced far 
beyond its average strength." (Rob. Owen: "Observations on the effects of the 
manufacturing system, 2nd Ed., Lond., 1817.") 

2 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of appearance 
of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of attributing the long hours 
of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping of children, practised by capitalists 
in the infancy of the factory system, on workhouses and orphanages, by means of 
which robbery, unresisting material for exploitation was procured. Thus, for in- 
stance, Fielden, himself a manufacturer, says : "It is evident that the long hours 
of work were brought about by the circumstance of so great a number of destitute 
children being supplied from different parts of the country, that the niitOI WW 
independent of the hands, and that having once established the custom by menu of 

the miserable materials they had procured in this way, they could impose it 00 their 
neighbour! with tin' -renter facility." (J. Fielden : "The Curse of the Pkotory 

System. Loud., I886,"p. 11.) With referenoe to the labour >f women, Banndere, 

the Factory inspector, says in his report of L844 J "Amongst the female operatives 

there are some women who, for many weeks in succession, except foa I f< u 

IN employed from ti a.m. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so t! 

6 days of tin- week they have oidy hours left out of the 1M, for going to and tioia 

their homes and resting in hed." 



4 02 Capitalist Production. 

each single commodity. The active lifetime of a machine is, 
however, clearly dependent on the length of the working day, 
or on the duration of the daily labour-process multiplied by 
the number of days for which the process is carried on. 

The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional 
to its working time. And even if it were so, a machine work- 
ing 16 hours daily for 7-| years, covers as long a working period 
as, and transmits to the total product no more value than, the 
same machine would if it worked only 8 hours daily for 15 
years. But in the first case the value of the machine would 
be reproduced twice as quickly as in the latter, and the capi- 
talist would, by this use of the machine, absorb in *7\ years as 
much surplus -value as in the second case he would in 15. 

The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. 
The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, 
the other from non-use, as a sword rusts when left in its 
scabbard. The latter kind is due to the elements. The 
former is more or less directly proportional, the latter to a 
certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the 
machine. 1 

But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine 
also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. It 
loses exchange-value, either by machines of the same sort being 
produced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into 
competition with it. 2 In both cases, be the machine ever so 
young and full of life, its value is no longer determined by 
the labour actually materialised in it, but by the labour-time 
requisite to reproduce either it or the better machine. It has, 
therefore, lost value more or less. The shorter the period 
taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger of 
moral depreciation; and the longer the working day, the shorter 
is that period. When machinery is first introduced into an 
industry, new methods of reproducing it. more cheaply follow 

1 " Occasion . . . injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mechanism by 
inaction." (Ure, 1. c, p. 28). 

2 The " Manchester Spinner" {Times, 2Gth Nov., 1862) before referred to says in re- 
lation to this subject : " It (namely, the " allowance for deterioration of machioery ") 
is also intended to cover the loss which is constantly arising from the superseding 
of machines before they are worn out, by others of a new and better construction." 



Machinery and Modem Industry. 403 

blow upon blow, 1 and so do improvements, that not only affect 
individual parts and details of the machine, but its entire build 
It is, therefore, in the early day3 of the life of machinery that 
this special incentive to the prolongation of the working day 
makes itself felt most acutely. 2 

Given the length of the working day, all other circumstances 
remaining the same, the exploitation of double the number of 
workmen demands, not only a doubling of that part of constant 
capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also 
of that part which is laid out in raw material and auxiliary 
substances. The lengthening of the working day, on the other 
hand, allows of production on an extended scale without any 
alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and 
buildings. 3 Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus- 
value, but the outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. It is 
true that this takes place, more or less, with every lengthening 
of the working day ; but in the case under consideration, the 
change is more marked, because the capital converted into the 
instruments of labour preponderates to a greater degree. 4 The 
development of the factory system fixes a constantly increasing 
portion of the capital in a form, in which, on the one hand, its 
value is capable of continual self-expansion, and in which, on 
the other hand, it loses both use-value and exchange-value when- 

1 " It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly-invented 
machine will cost about five times as much as the construction of the second." (liab- 
fcage, 1. c,, p. 211). 

■ "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for making patent 
net was so great that a machine in good repair which had cost £1,200, sold a few 
years after for £00 . . . improvements lucceeded each other so rapidly, that 
machines which bad never been finished were abandoned in the hands of their 
Bakers, because new improvements had superseded their utility." (liahbage, 1. c, 
p. 233.) In these stormy, go-ahead times, therefore, the tulle manafaotureri soon 

I (tended the working day, by means of double sets of hands, from the Original 8 
hours to 24. 

" It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbiugs and Sowing! of the markets and the 
alternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions will constantly reonr, in 
which the manufacturer may employ additional floating capital without employing 
additional fixed capital . . . if additional quantities of raw material can be worked 
up without incurring ao additional expense foi buildings and maohinerj , EL Ton 

II On Wages and Combinations. London, L834,"p. <n5.) 

1 This oircumstanoe is mentioned only for the sake of completeness, for I shall 
f."t consider the rat< >f profit, i.c, the ratio >f the surplus value to the total capital 

need, until I come to the thud book. 



404 Capitalist Production. 

ever it loses contact with living labour. " When a labourer," said 
Mr. Ash worth, a cotton magnate, to Professor Nassau W. Senior, 
"lays down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital 
worth eighteenpence. When one of our people leaves the mill, 
he renders useless a capital that has cost £100,000. 1 Only 
fancy ! making " useless " for a single moment, a capital that 
has cost £100,000 ! It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single 
one of our people should ever leave the factory ! The increased 
use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received 
from Ash worth clearly perceives, makes a constantly increasing 
lengthening of the working day " desirable. " 2 

Machinery produces relative surplus-value ; not only by 
directly depreciating the value of labour-power, and by in- 
directly cheapening the same through cheapening the com- 
modities that enter into its reproduction, but also, when it is 
first introduced sporadically into an industry, by converting 
the labour employed by the owner of that machinery, into 
labour of a higher degree and greater efficacy, by raising the 
social value of the article produced above its individual value, 
and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day's 
labour-power by a smaller portion of the value of a day's pro- 
duct. Dm ing this transition period, when the use of machinery 
is a sort of monopoly, the profits are therefore exceptional, and 
the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly " the sunny time 
of tins his first love," by prolonging the working day as much 
as possible. The magnitude of the profit whets his appetite 
for more profit. 

As the use of machinery becomes more general in a parti- 
cular industry, the social value of the product sinks down to 
its individual value, and the law that surplus-value does not 

1 Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act. London, 1837," pp. 13, 14. 

2 " The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital . . . makes long hours of 
work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &c, "the motives to long 
hours of work will become greater, as the only means by which a large proportion of 
fixed capital can be made profitable." (1. c, pp. 11-13.) "There are certain ex- 
penses upon a mill which go on in the same proportion whether the mill be running 
short or full time, as, for instance, rent, rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, 
wages of several permanent servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other 
charges upon a manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits 
increases as the production decreases. ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," 
P. 19). 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 405 

arise from the labour-power that has been replaced by the 
machinery, but from the labour-power actually employed in 
working with the machinery, asserts itself. Surplus-value 
arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount 
of surplus-value depends on two factors, viz., the rate of 
surplus-value and the number of the workmen simultaneously 
employed. Given the length of the working day, the rate of 
surplus-value is determined by the relative duration of the 
necessary labour and of the surplus-labour in a day. The 
number of the labourers simultaneously employed depends, on 
its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. 
Now, however much the use of machinery may increase the 
surplus-labour at the expense of the necessary labour by 
heightening the productiveness of labour, it is clear that it 
attains this result, only by diminishing the number of workmen 
employed by a given amount of capital. It converts what was 
formerly variable capital, invested in labour- power, into 
machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce 
surplus- value. It is impossible, for instance, to squeeze as 
much surplus- value out of 2 as out of 24 labourers. If each of 
these 24 men gives only one hour of surplus-labour in 12, the 
24 men give together 24 hours of surplus-labour, while 24 
hours is the total labour of the two men. Hence, the applica- 
tion of machinery to the production of surplus-value implies 
a contradiction which is immanent in it, since, of the two 
factors of the surplus-value created by a given amount of 
capital, one, the rate of surplus-value, cannot be increased, ex- 
cept 03' diminishing the other, the number of workmen. This 
contradiction comes to light, as soon as by the general employ- 
ment of machinery in a given industry, the value of the 
machine-produced commodity regulates the value of all com- 
modities of the same sort ; and it is this contradiction, that in 
its turn, drives the capitalist, without his being conscious of 
the fact, 1 to excessive lengthening of the working day, in order 
that he may compensate the decrease in the relative number 

1 Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who arc cml>u« ■! 
with his views, arc unconscious of this immanent contradiction, will ippaM from the 
tirtst part of the third book. 



406 Capitalist Production. 

of labourers exploited, by an increase not only of the relative, 
but of the absolute surplus-labour. 

If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the 
one hand, supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive 
lengthening of the working day, and radically changes, as well 
the methods of labour, as also the character of the social work- 
ing organism, in such a manner as to break down all opposition 
to this tendency, on the other hand it produces, partly by 
opening out to the capitalist new strata of the working cla>s, 
previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free the 
labourers it supplants, a surplus working population, 1 which is 
compelled to submit to the dictation of capital. Hence that 
remarkable phenomenon in the history of Modern Industry, 
that machinery sweeps away every moral and natural restric- 
tion on the length of the working day. Hence, too, the 
economical paradox, that the most powerful instrument for 
shortening labour-time, becomes the most unfailing means for 
placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his 
family, at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of 
expanding the value of his capital. " If," dreamed Aristotle, 
the greatest thinker of antiquity, " if every tool, when sum- 
moned, or even of its own accord, could do the work that befits 
it, just as the creations of Daedalus moved of themselves, or the 
tripods of Hephsestos went of their own accord to their sacred 
work, if the weavers' shuttles were to weave of themselves, 
then there would be no need either of apprentices for the 
master workers, or of slaves for the lords." 2 And Antiparos ? 
a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the invention of the 
water-wheel for grinding corn, an invention that is the 
elementary form of all machinery, as the giver of freedom to 
female slaves, and the brin^er back of the golden a^e. 3 Oh ! 

1 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not only the 
means of producing commodities, but of creating a " redundant population." 

5 F. Biese. " Die Philosophie des Aristoteles," Vol 2. Berlin, 1S42. p. 408. 

3 I give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings into relief, 
quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to division of labour, the antithesis 
between the views of the ancients and the moderns. " Spare the hand that grinds 
the corn, Oh, miller girls, and softly sleep. Let Chanticleer announce the morn in 
vain ! Deo lias commanded the work of the girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now 
they skip lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes 



Machinery and Modern Industry, 407 

those heathens ! They understood, as the learned Bastiat, and 
before him the still wiser MacCulloch have discovered, nothing 
of political economy and Christianity. They did not, for 
example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of 
lengthening the working day. They perhaps excused the 
slavery of one on the ground that it was a means to the full de- 
velopment of another. But to preach slavery of the masses, in 
order that a few crude and half-educated parvenus, might be- 
come " eminent spinners," " extensive sausage-makers," and 
" influential shoe-black dealers," to do this, they lacked the 
bump of Christianity. 

c. Intensification of Labour. 

The immoderate lengthening of the working day, produced 
by machinery in the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on 
the part of society, the very sources of whose life are menaced ; 
and, thence, to a normal working day whose length is fixed by 
law. Thenceforth a phenomenon that we have already met 
with, namely, the intensification of labour, develops into great 
importance. Our analysis of absolute surplus-value had refer- 
ence primarily to the extension or duration of the labour, its 
intensity being assumed as given. We now proceed to con- 
sider the substitution of a more intensified labour for labour of 
more extensive duration, and the degree of the former. 

It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery 
spreads, and the experience of a special class of workmen 
habituated to machinery accumulates, the rapidity and inten- 
sity of labour increase as a natural consequence. Thus in 

tad pull round the load of the revolving stones. Let us live the life of our fathers, 
aud let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us." 

" Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Miillerinnen und schhifet 
Sanft ! M verkiinde der Btan euch den HoCgOO umsonst ! 
Diio hat die Arbeit der Uldohen den NymphtMi hefohlen, 
Und itzt hiipfen Hie leicht iiber die Rider dahin, 
1 >;ihh die erschutterten Achscn mit ihren Speiehen nieh w;il/ru, 
Und In Krei.se die La*t drehen dtl wiil/.rnden St, ins. 
LaBst uns leben das Ltbta <ler V liter, und lanHt uns der QtlWHI 
Arbeitslos uiih freun, welche die (lottin uns sehenkt. " 

(Gftdfobtt aus dm Griechischen ubcrsetzt von ( 'hristi;in t: 
burg, 17S'J.) 



408 Capitalist Prodiiction. 

England, during half a century, lengthening of the working 
day went hand in hand with increasing intensity of factory 
labour. Nevertheless the reader will clearly see, that where 
we have labour, not carried on by fits and starts, but repeated 
day after day with unvarying uniformity, a point must inevit- 
ably be reached, where extension of the working day and in- 
tensity of the labour mutually exclude one another, in such a 
way that lengthening of the working day becomes compatible 
only with a lower degree of intensity, and, a higher degree of 
intensity, only with a shortening of the working day. 80 soon 
as the gradually surging revolt of the working class compelled 
Parliament to shorten compulsorily the hours of labour, and to 
begin by imposing a normal working day on factories proper, 
so soon consequently as an increased production of surplus 
value by the prolongation of the working day was once for all 
put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all 
its might into the production of relative surplus- value, by 
hastening on the further improvement of machinery. At the 
same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus- 
value. Generally speaking, the mode of producing relative 
surplus-value consists in raising the productive power of the 
workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a given time 
with the same expenditure of labour. Labour-time continues 
to transmit as before the same value to the total product, but 
this unchanged amount of exchange value is spread over more 
use-values ; hence the value of each single commodity sinks. 
Otherwise, however, so soon as the compulsory shortening of 
the hours of labour takes place. The immense impetus it gives 
to the development of productive power, and to economy in 
the means of production, imposes on the workman increased 
expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened tension of 
labour-power, and closer filling up of the pores of the working 
day, or condensation of labour to a degree that is attainable 
only within the limits of the shortened working day. This 
condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period 
thenceforward counts for what it really is, a greater quantity 
of labour. In addition to a measure of its extension, i.e., dura- 
tion, labour now acquires a measure of its intensitv or of the 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 409 

degree of its condensation or density. 1 The denser hour 
of the ten hours' working-day contains more labour, i.e., ex- 
pended labour-power, than the more porous hour of the 
twelve hours' working-day. The product therefore of one of 
the former hours has as much or more value than has the pro- 
duct of li of the latter hours. Apart from the increased yield 
of relative surplus- value through the heightened productiveness 
of labour, the same mass of value is now produced for the cap- 
italist say by 3 J hours of surplus labour, and 6 J hours of neces- 
sary labour, as was previously produced by four hours of surplus 
labour and eight hours of necessary labour. 

We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified? 

The first effect of shortening the working day results from 
the self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in 
an inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure. Hence, 
within certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is 
gained by the increasing tension of labour-power. That the 
workman moreover really does expend more labour-power, is 
ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays him. 2 In 
those industries, such as potteries, where machinery plays little 
or no part, the introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly 
shown that the mere shortening of the working-day increases 
to a wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, con- 
tinuity, and energy of the labour. 3 It seemed, however, doubt- 
ful whether this effect was produced in the factory proper, 
where the dependence of the workman on the continuous and 
uniform motion of the machinery had already created the 
strictest discipline. Hence, when in 1844 the reduction of the 
working-day to less than twelve hours was being debated, the 
masters almosi unanimously declared " that their overlookers 
in the different rooms took good care that the hands lost no 
time," that " the extent of vigilance and attention on t he part 

1 There arc, of course, always differences in the intensities of the lahour ill various 
industries. But these differences are, as A'lam Smith lias shown, compensated 
partial extent hy minor circumstances, peculiar to each sort of lahour. Lahour time, 
as a meaHuro of value;, is not, however, affected in this case, except in s<> t.u is tie 
duration of lahour, and the degree of its intensity, are two antithetical and mutually 
rxclusive expressions tot one and the Mine ^uinlify of lahour. 

3 Kh|>c"i:iI1v by piece-work, a form we Khali investigate in Part VI. of thl 

* Seo " R«p, of Insp. of p« | fa iUst OotobfT, 



4io Capitalist Production. 

of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased," and, 
therefore, that the speed of the machinery and other conditions 
remaining unaltered, " to expect in a well-managed factory any 
important result from increased attention of the workmen was 
an absurdity." 1 This assertion was contradicted by experi- 
ments. Mr. Robert Gardner reduced the hours of labour in 
his two large factories at Preston, on and after the 20th April, 
1844, from twelve to eleven hours a day. The result of about 
a year's working was that " the same amount of product for the 
same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned 
in eleven hours as much wages as they did before in twelve.** 
I pass over the experiments made in the spinning and carding 
rooms, because they were accompanied by an increase of 2% in 
the speed of the machines. But in the weaving department, 
where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy articles were 
woven, there was not the slightest alteration in the conditions 
of the work. The result was: "From 6th January to 20th 
April, 1844, with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages of 
each hand 10s. lid., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with 
day of eleven hours, average weekly wages 10s. 3Jd." 3 Here 
we have more produced in eleven hours than previously in 
twelve, and entirely in consequence of more steady application 
and economy of time by the workpeople. While they got the 
same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist 
got the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, 
and other such items, for one hour. Similar experiments, and 
with the like success, were carried out in the mills of Messrs. 
Horrocks and Jacson. 

The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, 
the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by 

1 Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April 1845, pp. 
20-21. 

1. c, p. 19. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly wages 
depended on the quantity produced. 

» 1. c, p. 22. 

4 The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. The 
workpeople told the factory inspector : "We work with more spirit, we have the 
reward ever before us of getting away sooner at night, and one active and cheerful 
spirit pervades the whole mill, from the youngest piecer to the oldest hand, and we 
can greatly help each other " (L c.) ' 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 411 

enabling the workman to exert more strength in a given time 
So soon as that shortening becomes compulsory, machinery be- 
comes in the hands of capital the objective means, systemati- 
cally employed for squeezing out more labour in a given time. 
This is effected in two ways : by increasing the speed of the 
machinery, and by giving the workman more machinery to 
tent. Improved construction of the machinery is necessary, 
partly because without it greater pressure cannot be put on 
the workman, and partly because the shortened hours of labour 
force the capitalist to exercise the strictest watch over the cost 
of production. The improvements in the steam-engine have 
increased the piston speed, and at the same time have made it 
possible, by means of a greater economy of power, to drive 
with the same or even a smaller consumption of coal more 
machinery with the same engine. The improvements in the 
transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so 
strikingly distinguishes modern from the older machinery, 
have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a 
constantly decreasing minimum. Finally, the improvements 
in the operative machines have, while reducing their size, in- 
creased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power- 
loom ; or, while increasing the size of their frame- work, have 
also increased the extent and number of their working parts 
as in spinning mules, or have added to the speed of these 
working parts by imperceptible alterations of detail, such as 
those which ten years ago increased the speed of the spindles in 
self-acting mules by one-fifth. 

The reduction of the working day to 12 hours dates in 
England from 1832. In 183G a manufacturer stated : M Tbe 
labour now undergone in the factories is much greater than it 
used to bo . . . compared with thirty or foity years ago . . . 
owing to the greater attention and activity required by the 
greatly increased speed which is given to the machinery." 1 In 
the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in 
the House of Commons the following statements, supported by 
documentary evidence: 

"The labour performed by those engaged in the proceaaea of 

1 John Fielden, I. c, p, W'l. 



4 J 2 Capitalist Production. 

manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such 
operations. Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that 
would demand the sinews of millions of men ; but it has also 
prodigiously multiplied the labour of those who are governed by 
its fearful movements ... In 1815, the labour of following a 
pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40 — reckoning 12 hours 
to the working-day — involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. 
In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of mules, 
spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and 
frequently more. In 1835" (query — 1815 or 1825 ?) "the spinner 
put up daily, on each of these mules, 820 stretches, making a 
total of 1 ; G40 stretches in the course of the day. In 1832, the 
spinner put up on each mule 2,200 stretches, making a total of 
4,400. In 1844, 2,400 stretches, making a total of 4,800 ; and 
in some cases the amount of labour required is even still 
greater ... I have another document sent to me in 1842, stat- 
ing that the labour is progressively increasing — increasing not 
only because the distance to be travelled is greater, but be- 
cause the quantity of goods produced is multiplied, while the 
hands are fewer in proportion than before ; and, moreover, be- 
cause an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it 
is more difficult to work ... In the carding-room there has 
also been a great increase of labour. One person there does 
the work formerly divided between two. In the weaving-room, 
where a vast number of persons are employed, and principally 
females . . . the labour has increased within the last few years 
fully 10 per cent, owing to the increased speed of the machinery 
in spinning. In 1838, the number of hanks spun per week 
was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. In 1819 the num- 
ber of picks in power-loom-weaving per minute was GO — in 
1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour." 1 

In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had 
already been reached in 1844 under theTwelve Hours' Act, there 
appeared to be a justification for the assertion made at that 
time by the English manufacturers, that any further progress 
in that direction was impossible, and therefore that every 
further reduction of the hours of labour meant a lessened pro- 

1 Lord Ashley, L c, p. 6-9, passim. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 413 

duction. The apparent correctness of their reasons will be 
best shown by the following contemporary statement by 
Leonard Horner, the factory inspector, their ever watchful 
censor. 

" Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regu- 
lated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of 
the mill owner to drive it at the utmost rate of speed con- 
sistent with these following conditions, viz., the preservation 
of the machinery from too rapid deterioration; the preservation 
of the quality of the article manufactured ; and the capability 
of the workman to follow the motion without a greater exer- 
tion than he can sustain for a constancy. One of the most 
important problems, therefore, which the owner of a factory 
lias to solve is to find out the maximum speed at which he can 
run, with a due regard to the above conditions. It frequently 
happens that he finds he has gone too fast, that breakages and 
bad work more than counterbalance the increased speed, and 
that he is obliged to slacken his pace. I therefore concluded, 
that as an active and intelligent millowner would find out the 
safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in 
eleven hours as in twelve. I further assumed that the opera- 
tive paid by piece work, would exert himself to the utmost 
consistent with the power of continuing at the same iate." 1 
Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction 
of the working hours below twelve would necessarily diminish 
production. 2 He himself, ten years later, cites his opinion of 
1845 in proof of how much he under-estimated in that year 
the elasticity of machinery, and of man's labour-power, both of 
which are simultaneously stretched to an extreme by the 
Compulsory shortening of the working day. 

We now come to the period that follows the introduction of 
the Ten Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, 
.silk, and ilax mills. 

"The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles ">00, 
and upon mules 1000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of 

1 Rep, of Ins|>. of Fact, for Quarter ending SOtfa September, 1844, and from l»t 
0< tober, L844, to 80th April, 1845. p. l>o. 

: 1. c, p, 11. 



414 Capitalist Production. 

the throstle spindle, which in 1839 was 4500 times a minute, 
is now (1862) 5000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5000, is 
now 0000 times a minute, amounting in the former case to one- 
tenth, and in the second case to one-lifth additional increase." 1 
James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near 
Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written 
in 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine 
that had been made between the years 1848 and 1852. After 
remarking that the horse-power of steam-engines, being always 
estimated in the official returns according to the power of 
similar engines in 1828, 2 is only nominal, and can serve only 
as an index of their real power, he goes on to say : " I am con- 
fident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, 
we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent, more duty or work 
performed on the average, and that in many cases the identical 
steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 220 
feet per minute, yielded 50 horse-power, are now yielding up- 
wards of 100." . . . . " The modern steam-engine of 100 horse- 
power is capable of being driven at a much greater force than 
formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, the 
capacity and construction of the boilers, &c." . . . "Although 
the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the 
horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands em- 
ployed in proportion to the machinery." 3 " In the year 1850, 
the factories of the United Kingdom employed 134,217 nominal 
horse-power to give motion to 25,638, 716 spindles and 301,445 
looms. The number of spindles and looms in 1856 was re- 
spectively 33,503,580 of the former, and 369,205 of the latter, 
which, reckoning the force of the nominal horse-power required 
to be the same as in 1850, would require a force equal to 
175,000 horses, but the actual power given in the return for 

i " Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1862," p. 62. 

- This was altered in the " Parliamentary Return "of 1862. In it the actual horse- 
power of the modern steam-engines and water-wheels appears in place of the nominal. 
The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the spinning spindles (as was 
the case in the " Returns " of 1839, 1850, and 1856) ; further, in the case of woollen 
mills, the number of " gigs " is added, a distinction made between jute and hemp 
mills on the one hand and flax mills on the other, and finally stocking- weaving is for 
the first time inserted in the report. 

a " Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1856," pp. 13 14, 20 and 1852, p. 23. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 4 1 5 

1856 is 161,435, less by above 10,000 horses than, calculating 
upon the basis of the return of 1850, the factories ought to 
have required in 1856." * " The facts thus brought out by the 
Return (of 1856) appear to be that the factory system is in- 
creasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are 
employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, 
there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery; 
that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight 
of machinery by economy of force and other methods, and 
that an increased quantity of work can be turned off by im- 
provements in machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by 
increase of speed of the machinery, and by a variety of other 
causes." 3 

" The great improvements made in machines of every kind 
have raised their productive power very much. Without any 
doubt, the shortening of the hours of labour .... gave the 
impulse to these improvements. The latter, combined with 
the more intense strain on the workman, have had the effect, 
that at least as much is produced in the shortened (by two 
hours or one-sixth) working-day as was previously produced 
during the longer one." 3 

One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the 
manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploita- 
tion of labour-power. From 1838 to 1850, the average pro- 
portional increase in English cotton and other factories was 
32 /, while from 1850 to 1856 it amounted to 86 X. 

But however great the progress of English industry had 
been during the 8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence 
of a working-day of 10 hours, it was far surpassed during the 
next period <>f (5 years from 1856 to 1862. In silk factories, for 
instance, there were in 1856, spindles 1,093,799; in 1862, 
1,388,544; in 1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709. But the 
number of operatives was, in 1856, 56,131 ; in 1862, 52,429. 
The increase; in the spindles was therefore 26. ( J / aH( ^ m , '"' 
looms 15.U / , while the number of the operatives decreased 7% 

L c, i». U L& il c, p. 20L 

1 Reports, &o., for 81ft Ootol p. Ma Oompui B fee., foi 

Iptil, 1800, p. 30, ieqq. 



416 Capitalist Production. 

In the year 1850 there were employed in worsted mills 875,830 
spindles ; in 1856, 1,324,549 (increase 51.2%), and in 1862, 
1,289,172 (decrease 2.7%). But if we deduct the doubling 
spindles that figure in the numbers for 1856, but not in those 
for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of spindles 
remained nearly stationary. On the other hand, after 1850, 
the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases doubled. 
The number of power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 
32,617; in 1856, 38,956 ; in 1862, 43,048. The number of the 
operatives was, in 1850, 79,737; in 1856, 87,794; in 1862, 
S6,063 ; included in these, however, the children under 14 
years of age were, in 1850, 9,956; in 1856, 11,228; in 1862, 
13,178. In spite, therefore, of the greatly increased number of 
looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number of the 
workpeople employed decreased, and that of the children ex- 
ploited increased. 1 

On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the House of 
Commons : " I have been informed by delegates from 16 
districts of Lancashire and Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, 
that the work in the factories is, in consequence of the improve- 
ments in machinery, constantly on the increase. Instead of as 
formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one 
person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no un- 
common thing for one person to tent four. Twelve hours' 
work, as is evident from the facts adduced, is now compressed 
into less than 10 hours. It is therefore self-evident, to what 
an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has in- 
creased during the last 10 years." 2 

Although, therefore, the Factory Inspectors unceasingly and 
with justice, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, 

i "Report of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862," pp. 100 and 130. 

2 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 26 pieces of 
certain quality, length, and breadth ; while on the old power-looms he could make no 
more than 4 such pieces. The cost of weaving a piece of such cloth had already soon 
after 1850 fallen from 2s. 9d. to 5£d. 

" Thirty years ago (1811) one spinner with three piecers was not required to attend 
to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. At the present time (1871) he 
has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2200 spindles, and produces not less than seven 
times as much yarn as in 1841. " (Alex. Redgrave, Factory Inspector — in the Journal 
of Arts, 5th January, 1872.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 



41/ 



yet they admit that the shortening of the hours of labour has 
already called forth such an intensification of the labour as is 
injurious to the health of the workman and to his capacity for 
work. " In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an ex- 
hausting state of excitement necessary to enable the workers 
satisfactorily to mind the machinery, the motion of which has 
been greatly accelerated within the last few years, seems to me 
not unlikely to be one of the causes of that excess of mortality 
from lung disease, which Dr. Greenhow has pointed out in his 
recent report on this subject." 1 There cannot be the slightest 
doubt that the tendency that urges capital so soon as a pro- 
longation of the hours of labour is once for all forbidden, to 
compensate itself, by a systematic heightening of the intensity 
of labour, and to convert every improvement in machinery into 
a more perfect means of exhausting the workman, must soon 
lead to a state of things in which a reduction of the hours of 
labour will again be inevitable. 2 On the other hand, the rapid 
advance of English industry between 1848 and the present 
time, under the influence of a day of 10 hours, surpasses the 
advance made between 1833 and 1847, when the day was 12 
hours long, by far more than the latter surpasses the advance 
made during the half century after the first introduction of 
the factory system, when the working day was without limits. 3 



1 Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct. 1861, pp. 25, 26, 

2 The agitation for a working day of 8 hours has now (1867) begun in Lancashire 
among the factory operatives. 

3 The following few figures indicate the increase in the " factories " of the United 
Kingdom since 1848 : 



Quantity Expor- 
ted, 1818. 



Quantity Expor- 
ted, 1851. 



COTTON. 

Cotton yarn . 
Bewing thread 

Cotton cloth . 
i i.\.\ ^ iii:mi\ 

Yarn 

Cloth 



lbs. 135,831,102 

11m. 

yds. 1,091,373,930 



lbs. 
yds. 



SII.K. 

Yarn 

Clotli yds. 

wool,. 
Woollen and 
Wonted vams 
Moth ydi. 



n.s. 



lbs. 



11,722,182 
88,901, f>l«J 

400 ,8 .'5 



lbs. 148,966,106 
lbs. 4,892,176 
yds. 1,543,101,769 

lbs. 18,s I 
jrdf. 1^9,100,753 



Quantity Expor- 
ted, 1800. 



lbs. 

yds. 



462,5 , 8 

1,181,155 



lbs. 11. 
yda. 841,1 

•1 D 



lbs. 
yds. 

lbs. 
yds. 

lbs. 

)ds. 



81,21 
1 18,996,778 



17,61 



Quantity Expor 
ted, 1866. 



lbs. 197,848,655 

lbs. 6,297,5')} 
yds. 2,770,218,427 



103,7.M.i 
ll»s. 4,648,011 

\ds. 2,016,2 



lbs. 



897.402 lb*. 
1, 307, 



247,01 
2,86 



lbs. 81," 



4i8 



Capitalist Production. 



SECTION IV. — THE FACTORY. 



At the commencement of this chapter we considered that 
which we may call the body of the factory, i.e., machinery 
organised into a system. We there saw how machinery, by 
annexing the labour of women and children, augments the 
number of human beings who form the material for capitalistic 
exploitation, how it confiscates the whole of the workman's 
disposable time, by immoderate extension of the hours of 
labour, and how finally its progress, which allows of enormous 
increase of production in shorter and shorter periods, serves as 
a means of systematically getting more work done in a shorter 
time, or of exploiting labour-power more intensely. We now 
turn to the factory as a whole, and that in its most perfect 
form. 

Dr. Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on 
the one hand as " Combined co-operation of many orders of 
workpeople, adult and young, in tending with assiduous skill, a 





Value Expor- 
ted, 1848. 


Value Expor- 
ted, 1851. 


Value Expor- 
ted, 1860 


Value Expor- 
ted, 1865. 


COTTON. 

Yarn 


£ 

5,927,831 

16,753,369 

493,449 

2,802,789 

77,789 

776,975 

5,733.828 


£ 

6,634,026 

23,454,810 

951,426 
4,107,396 

195.3S0 
1,136,398 

1,484,544 
* 377,183 


£ 

9,870,875 

42,141, 5u5 

1,801, -272 
4,804,803 

918,342 
1,587,303 

3,843,450 
12,156,998 


£ 
10,351,04 


Cloth 


46,903,796 
2,505,497 


FLAX & HEMP. 

Yarn 


Cloth 


9,155,318 


SILK. 

Yarn 


768,067 


Cloth 


1,409,221 

5,424,017 
20,102,259 


WOOL. 

Yarn 


Cloth 



See the Bluebooks "Statistical Abstract of the United Kingdom, Nos. 8 and 13." 
Lond., 18G1 and 1866. In Lancashire the number of mills increased only 4 per cent, 
between 1839 and 1850; 19 per cent, between 1850 and 1856 ; and 33 per cent, be- 
tween 1856 and 1862 ; while the persons employed in them during each of the above 
periods of 11 years increased absolutely, but diminished relatively. (See "Rep. of 
Insp. of Fact., for 31st Oct., 1862," p. 63.) The cotton trade preponderates in 
Lancashire. We may form an idea of the stupendous nature of the cotton trade in 
that district, when we consider that, of the gross number of textile factories in the 
United Kingdom, it absorbs 45.2 per cent., of the spindles 83.3 per cent., of the 
power -looms 81.4 per cent., of the mechanical horse-power 72.6 per cent., and of th* 
total number of persons employed 58.2 per cent. (L C, p. 62-63.) 



Machinery and Modem Industry. 4 1 9 

system of productive machines, continuously impelled by a 
central power" (the prime mover); on the other hand, as "a 
vast automaton, composed of various mechanical and intel- 
lectual organs, acting in uninterrupted concert for the produc- 
tion of a common object, all of them being subordinate to a 
self-regulated moving force." These two descriptions are far 
from beino" identical. In one, the collective labourer, or social 
bodv of labour, appears as the dominant subject, and the me- 
chanical automaton as the object ; in the other, the automaton 
itself is the subject, and the workmen are merely conscious 
organs, co-ordinate with the unconscious organs of the automa- 
ton, and together with them, subordinated to the central 
moving-power. The first description is applicable to every 
possible employment of machinery on a large scale, the second 
is characteristic of its use by capital, and therefore of the 
modern factory system. Ure prefers therefore, to describe the 
central machine, from which the motion comes, not only as an 
automaton, but as an autocrat. " In these spacious halls the 
benignant power of steam summons around him his myriads 
of willing menials." 1 

Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it 
passes over to the machine. The capabilities of the tool are 
emancipated from the restraints that are inseparable from 
human labour-power. Thereby the technical foundation on 
which is based the division of labour in Manufacture, is swept 
away. Hence, in the place of the hierarchy of specialised 
workmen that characterises manufacture, there steps, in the 
automatic factory, a tendency to equalise and reduce to one 
and the same level every kind of work that has to be done 
\)y the minders of the machines ; 2 in the place of the artili- 
cially produced differentiations of the detail work men, step 
the natural differences of age and sex. 

So far as division of labour re-appears in the factory, it i-> 
primarily a distribution of the workmen among the specialised 
machines; and of masses of workmen, not however organise 1 
into groups, among the various departments of the factory, 

I I'rr, 1. c, p. IS. 

1 I'.., !. <•., p. 8L s,m Karl llarx, L 1 , p. L4 L4L 



420 Capitalist Production. 

in each of winch they work at a number of similar machines 
placed together ; their co-operation, therefore, is only simple. 
The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced by 
the connexion between the head workman and his few assist- 
ants. The essential division is, into workmen who are actually 
employed on the machines (among whom are included a few 
who look after the engine), and into mere attendants (almost 
exclusively children) of these workmen. Among the attend- 
ants are reckoned more or less all "Feeders " who supply the 
machines with the material to be worked. In addition to 
these two principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant 
class of persons, whose occupation it is to look after the whole 
of the machinery and repair it from time to time ; such as 
engineers, mechanics, joiners, &c. This is a superior class of 
workmen, some of them scientifically educated, others brought 
up to a trade ; it is distinct from the factory operative class, 
and merely aggregated to it. 1 This division of labour is purely 
technical. 

To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from 
childhood, in order that he may learn to adapt his own move- 
ments to the uniform and unceasing motion of an automaton. 
When the machinery, as a whole, forms a system of manifold 
machines, working simultaneously and in concert, the co-opera- 
tion based upon it, requires the distribution of various groups 
of workmen amonsr the different kinds of machines. But the 
employment of machinery does away with the necessity of 
crystallizing this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, 
\>y the constant annexation of a particular man to a particular 
function. 2 Since the motion of the whole system does not 

1 It looks very like intentional misleading by statistics (which misleading it would 
l>e possible to prove in detail in other cases too), when the English factory legislation 
excludes from its operation the class of labourers last mentioned in the text, while 
the parliamentary returns expressly include in the category of factory operatives, not 
only engineers, mechanics, &c, but also managers, salesmen, messengers, warehouso- 
men, packers, &rc, in short everybody, except the owner of the factory himself. 

2 Ure grants this. He says, " in case of need," the workmen can be moved at the 
will of the manager from one machine to another, and he triumphantly exclaims : 
" Such a, change is in flat contradiction with the old routine, that divides the labour, 
i ad to one workman assigns the task of fashioning the head of a needle, to another 
the sharpening of the point." He had much better have asked himself, why this 
'• old routine " is departed from in the automatic factory, only " in case of need." 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 4 2 1 

proceed from the workman, but from the machinery, a change 
of persons can take place at any time without an interruption 
of the work. The most striking proof of this is afforded by 
the relays system, put into operation by the manufacturers 
during their revolt from 1848-1850. Lastly, the quickness 
with which machine work is learnt by young people, does away 
with the necessity of bringing up for exclusive employment by 
machinery, a special class of operatives. 1 With regard to the 
work of the mere attendants, it can, to some extent, be replaced 
in the mill by machines, 2 and owing to its extreme simplicity, 
it allows of a rapid and constant change of the individuals 
burdened with this drudgery. 

Although then, technically speaking, the old system of 
division of labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs 
on in the factory, as a traditional habit handed down from 
Manufacture, and is afterwards systematically re-moulded and 
established in a more hideous form by capital, as a means of 
exploiting labour-power. The life-long speciality of handling 
one and the same tool, now becomes the life-long speciality of 
serving one and the same machine. Machinery is put to a 

1 When distress is very great, as, for instance, during the American civil war, tho 
factory operative is now and then set by the Bourgeois to do the roughest of work, 
such as road-making, &c. The English " ateliers nationaux " of 18G2 and the follow- 
ing years, established for the benefit of the destitute cotton operatives, differ from tho 
French of 1848 in this, than in the latter the workmen had to do unproductive work 
at the expense of the state, in the former they had to do productive municipal W01 b 
to the advantage of the bourgeois, and that, too, cheaper than the regular workmen, 
with whom they were thus thrown into competition. "The physical appearance of 
the cotton operatives is unquestionably improved. Tins 1 attribute ... as to the 
men, to outdoor labour on public works." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact.,"' 31st Oct., 1 

p. 69.) The writer here alludes to the Freston factory operatives, who were em 
ployed on Freston Moor. 

2 An example : The various mechanical apparatus intioduccd since the Act of ' 
into woollen mills, for replacing the labour of children. So soon as it shall happi in 
that the children of tho manufacturers themsi Ives have to go through a COU I 
schooling as helpers in the mill, this almost unexplored territory of meehanioi will 

Boon make remarkable progress. "Of machinery, perhaps self-acting mul 
dangerous as any other kind. Most of the accidents from them happen to ' 

children, from their creeping trader the mnlei to sweep the floor whilst the mulei are 
in motion. Several ' minders ' have i> en fined for tbii offenoe, bnt without n 

leneral benefit. If machine makers would only invent a self sweeper, by CjhOM use 

Mia ne c es si ty for these little children to creep under the machinery mighl 
tented, it would be s happy addition to our pro t e c t i ve mas ores." (" Reports of Insp, 
of Pact." for 81st Oct, 1866, p. 63.) 



422 Capitalist Production. 

wrong use, with the object of transforming the workman, from 
his very childhood, into a part of a detail-machine. 1 In this 
way, not only are the expenses of his re-production considerably 
lessened, but at the same time his helpless dependence upon 
the factory as a whole, and therefore upon the capitalist, is 
rendered complete. Here as everywhere else, we must dis- 
tinguish between the increased productiveness due to the 
development of the social process of production, and that due 
to the capitalist exploitation of that process. In handicrafts 
and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the 
factory, the machine makes use of him. There the movements 
of the instrument of labour proceed from him, here it is the 
movements of the machine that he must follow. In manu- 
facture the workmen are parts of a living mechanism. In the 
factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of the work- 
man, who becomes its mere living appendage. " The miserable 
routine of endless drudgery and toil in which the same 
mechanical process is gone through over and over again, is like 
the labour of Sisyphus. The burden of labour, like the rock, 
keeps ever falling back on the worn-out labourer.'"' 2 At the 
same time that factory work exhausts the nervous system to 
the uttermost, it does away with the many-sided play of the 
muscles, and confiscates every atom of freedom, both in bodily 
and intellectual activity. 3 The lightening of the labour, even, 
becomes a sort of torture, since the machine does not free the 
labourer from work, but deprives the work of all interest. 
Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only 
a labour-process, but also a process of creating surplus-value, 
has this in common, that it is not the workman that employs 
the instruments of labour, but the instruments of labour that 

1 So much then for Proudhon's wonderful idea: he "construes" machinery not 
as a synthesis of instruments of labour, but as a synthesis of detail operations for the 
benefit of the labourer himself. 

2 F- Engels, 1. c. p. 217. Even an ordinary and optimist freetrader, like Mr. 
Molinari, goes so far as to say " Un homme s'use plus vite en surveillant, quinze 
heures par jour, revolution uniforme d'un mecanisme, qu'en exercant, dans le meme 
espace de temps, sa force physique. Ce travail de surveillance qui servirait pcut- 
Otre d'utile gymnastique a 1 'intelligence, s'il n etait pas trop prolonge, detruit a a 
longue, par son exces, et l'intelligcnce, et !e corps meme.*' (G. de Mo.inari : " Etude* 
Kconomiques." Paril 1840.) 

3 F. Engels. I. c. p. 216. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 423 

employ the workman. But it is only in the factory system 
that this inversion for the first time acquires technical and 
palpable reality. By means of its conversion into an automa- 
ton, the instrument of labour confronts the labourer, during 
the labour-process, in the shape of capital, of dead labour, that 
dominates, and pumps dry, living labour-power. The separa- 
tion of the intellectual powers of production from the manual 
labour, and the conversion of those powers into the might of 
capital over labour, is, as we have already shown, finally com- 
pleted by modern industry erected on the foundation of 
machinery. The special skill of each individual insignificant 
factory operative vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity before 
the science, the gigantic physical forces, and the mass of 
labour that are embodied in the factorv mechanism and, 
together with that mechanism, constitute the power of the 
"master." This " master," therefore, in whose brain the 
machinery and his monopoly of it are inseparably united, 
whenever he falls out with his " hands," contemptuously tells 
them : " The factory operatives should keep in wholesome 
remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of 
skilled labour; and that there is none which is more easily 
acquired, or of its quality more amply remunerated, or which 
by a short training of the least expert can be more quickly, as 
well as abundantly, acquired. . . . The master's machinery 
really plays a far more important part in the business of pro- 
duction than the labour and the skill of the operative, which 
six months' education can teach, and a common labourer can 
learn." 3 The technical subordination of the workman to the 
uniform motion of the instruments of labour, and the peculiar 
composition of the body of workpeople, consisting as it does of 
individuals of both sexes and of all acres, irive rise to a barrack 
discipline, which is elaborated into a complete Bystem in the 
factory, and which fully developes the before mentioned labour 
of overlooking, thereby dividing the workpeople into operatn es 
and overlookers, into private Boldiera and Bergeants of an 

1 "The Master KpiniiM .-,' ami Manuf.ietm ei.-,' Defence Rind. B port ©f the OoiB 
mittee." Manchester, 1854, p. 17. W • shall Mt hereafter, that the " 
»ing quite another song, when he Ls threatened with tin "UVtOg 

automaton. 



424 Capitalist Production. 

industrial army. " The main difficulty [in the automatic 
factory] . . . lay . . . above all in training human beings to 
renounce their desultory habits of work, and to identify them- 
selves with the unvarying regularity of the complex automaton. 
To devise and administer a successful code of factory discipline, 
suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean 
enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright I Even at the 
present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its 
labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible 
to convert persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory 
hands." ! The factory code in which capital formulates, like a 
private legislator, and at his own good will, his autocracy over 
his workpeople, unaccompanied by that division of responsi- 
bility, in other matters so much approved of by the bourgeoisie, 
and unaccompanied by the still more approved representative 
system, this code is but the capitalistic caricature of that social 
regulation of the labour-process which becomes requisite in 
co-operation on a great scale, and in the employment in 
common, of instruments of labour and especially ot machinery. 
The place of the slave driver's lash is taken by the over- 
looker's book of penalties. All punishments naturally resolve 
themselves into fines and deductions from wages, and the law- 
giving talent of the factory Lycurgus so arranges matters, 
that a violation of his laws is, if possible, more profitable to 
him than the keeping of them. 1 

1 Ure. 1. c. p. 15. Whoever knows the life history of Arkwright, will never dub 
this barber-genius "noble." Of all the great inventors of the 18th century, he was 
incontestably the greatest thiever of other people's inventions and the meanest 
fellow. 

2 "The slavery in which the bourgeoisie has bound the proletariat, comes nowhere 
more plainly into daylight than in the factory system. In it all freedom comes to an 
end both at law and in fact. The workman must be in the factory at half past five. 
If he come a few minutes late, he is punished ; if he come 10 minutes late, he is not 
allowed to enter until after breakfast, and thus loses a quarter of a day's wage. He 
must eat, drink and sleep at word of command. . . The despotic bell calls him from 
his bed, calls him from breakfast and dinner. And how does he fare in the mill ? 
Th- re the master is the absolute law-giver. He makes what regulations he pleases ; 
he alters and makes additions to his code at pleasure ; and if he insert the veriest 
nonsense, the courts say to the workman : Since you have entered into this contract 
voluntarily, you must now carry it out. . . These workmen are condemned to live, 
from their ninth year till their death, under this mental and bodily torture." (F. 
Engels 1. c. p. 217, sq.) What, " the courts say," I will illustrate by two examples. 
One occurs at Sheffield at the end of 18GG. In that town a workman had engaged 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 425 

We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under 
which factory labour is carried on. Every organ of sense is 

himself for 2 years in a steelworks. In consequence of a quarrel with his employer he 
left the works, and declared that under no circumstances would he work for that 
master any more. He was prosecuted for breach of contract, and condemned to two 
months' imprisonment. (If the master break the contract, he can be proceeded 
against only in a civil action, and risks nothing but money damages). After the 
workman has served his two months, the master invites him to return to the work* 
pursuant to the contract. Workman says ; No : he has already been punished for 
the breach. The master prosecutes again, the court condemns again, although one of 
the judges, Mr. Shee, publicly denounces this as a legal monstrosity, by which 
a man can periodically, as long as he lives, be punished over and over aj/ain for the 
same offence or crime. This judgment was given not by the " Great Unpaid," the 
provincial Dogberries, but by one of the highest courts of justice in London. — The 
second case occurs in Wiltshire at the end of November 1803. About 30 power- 
loom weavers, in the employment of one Harrup, a cloth manufacturer at Leowc is 
Mill, Westbury Leigh, struck work because master Harrup indulged in the agreeable 
habit of making deductions from their wages for being late in the morning; M. for 
2 minutes ; Is. for 3 minutes, and Is. Gd. for ten minutes. This is at the rate of 9s. 
per hour, and £-1 10s. Od. per diem ; while the wages of the weavers on the average of 
a year, never exceeded 10s. to 12s. weekly. Harrup also appointed ahoy to announce 
the starting time by a whistle, which he often did before six o'clock in the morning : 
and if the hands were not all there at the moment the whistle ceased, the doors were 
closed, and those hands who were outside were fined : and as there was no clock on 
the premises, the unfortunate hands were at the mercy of the young Harrup-inspired 
time-keeper. The hands on strike, mothers of families as well as girls, offercl to 
resume work if the time-keeper were replaced by a clock, and a more reasonable - 
of fines were introduced. Harrun summoned 10 women and girls before the magis- 
trates for breach of contract. To the utter indignation of all present, they were each 
mulcted in a fine of Gd. and 2s. Gd. for costs. Harrup was followed from the court 
by a crowd of people who hissed him. — A favourite operation with manufacturers [a to 
punish the workpeople by deductions made from their wages on account of faults in 
the material worked on. This method gave rise in 1SGG to a general strike in the 
English pottery districts. The reports of the Ch. Ernpl. Com. (18G3-1SGG), give 
where the worker not only receives no wages, but becomes, by means of his 
labour, and of the penal regulations, the debtor to boot, of his worthy master. The 
late cotton crisis also famished edifying I sample! of the sagacity shown l>y the 
factory autocrats in making deductions from wages. Mr. It. Laker, the InspectOl of 
Pactorii I, h ys, " I have myself had lately to direct prosecutions against one OOttOO 
mill occupier for having in these pinching and painful times deducted 10 1. • | 
from some of the young workers employed l>y him, for the surgeon's i 
which he himself had only paid Gd.), wh'-n only allowed by the law to deduct 3d., 
and by CUStom not hing at all . . . And I have been informed of another, who, in 

order to keep without the law, but to attain the same object, oharges the poof 
children who woik for him a shilling each, as • fee for learning th< m the art ami 

mystery of cotton ■pinning, so soon as tl. 1 l>y the lUTgeOD fit ami proper 

■us for that occupation. There may therefore be underourreni I i 

extraordinary exhibitions as iti A only whereret they arise, but parti 

at sin li times as ths pn lent) which without explanation, render them InexplioaJ 
the public understanding." He alludes hen boa strike of power loom « 
Derwen, June, L86& ('•Reports of [nap, of Pact for 80 April, IMS/ 1 li 

The uports alwayH go beyond tin u official da! 



426 Capitalist Production. 

injured in an equal degree by artificial elevation of the tem- 
perature, by the dust-laden atmosphere, by the deafening noise, 
not to mention danger to life and limb among the thickly 
crowded machine^', which, with the regularity of the seasons, 
issues its list of the killed and wounded in the industrial 
battle. 1 Economy of the social means of production, matured 
and forced as in a hothouse by the factory system, is turned, in 
the hands of capital, into systematic robbery of what is neces- 
sary for the life of the workman while he is at work, robbery 
of space, light, air, and of protection to his person against the 
dangerous and unwholesome accompaniments of the productive 
process, not to mention the robbery of appliances for the com- 
fort of the workman. 2 Is Fourier wrong when he calls factories 
" tempered bagnos ? " 3 

1 The protection afforded by the Factory Acts against dangerous machinery has 
had a beneficial effect. "But . . . there are other sources of accident which did 
not exist twenty years since; one especially, viz., the increased speed of the ma- 
chinery. Wheels, rollers, spindles and shuttles are now propelled at increased and 
increasing rates ; fingers must be quicker and defter in their movements to take up 
the broken thread, for, if placed with hesitation or carelessness, they are sacrificed. 
... A large number of accidents are caused by the eagerness of the workpeople to 
get through their work expeditiously. It must be remembered that it is of the 
highest importance to manufacturers that their machinery should be in motion, i.e., 
producing yarns and goods. Every minute's stoppage is not only a loss of power, 
but of production, and the workpeople are urged by the overlookers, who are inter- 
ested in the quantity of work turned off, to keep the machinery in motion ; and it is 
no less important to those of the operatives who are paid by the weight or piece, that 
the machines should be kept in motion. Consequently, although it is strictly for- 
bidden in many, nay in most factories, that machinery should be cleaned while in 
motion, it is nevertheless the constant practice in most if not in all, that the work- 
people do, unreproved, pick out waste, wipe rollers and wheels, &c, while their 
frames are in motion. Thus from this cause only, 90b' accidents have occurred during 

the six months Although a great deal of cleaning is constantly going on day 

by day, yet Saturday is generally the day set apart for the thorough cleaning of the 
machinery, and a great deal of this is done while the machinery is in motion." Since 
cleaning is not paid for, the workpeople seek to get done with it as speedily as pos- 
sible. Hence " the number of accidents which occur on Fridays, and especially on 
Saturdays, is much larger than on any other day. On the former day the excess is 
nearly 12 per cent, over the average number of the four first days of the week, and 
on the latter day the excess is 25 per cent, over the average of the preceding five 
• lays ; or, if the number of working-hours on Saturday being taken into account — 7£ 
hours on Saturday as compared with 10i on other days — there is an excess of 65 per 
cent, on Saturdays over the average of the other five days." ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 
Slit Oct., 180(5," p. 9, 15, 16, 17.) 

3 In Part I. of Hook III. I shall give an account of a recent campaign by the English 
manufacturers against the Clauses in the Factory Acts that protect the "hands" 
-.'.: a i nst dangerous machinery. For the present, let this one quotation from the official 
report of Leonard Horner suffice : " I have heard some millowners speak with inex- 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 427 



Section 5 — the strife between workman and machine. 

The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer 
dates back to the very origin of capital. It raged on through- 
out the whole manufacturing period. 1 But only since the intro- 
duction of machinery has the workman fought against the instru- 
ment of labour itself, the material embodiment of capital. He 
revolts against this particular form of the means of production, 
as being the material basis of the capitalist mode of production. 

In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts 
of the workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for 
weaving ribbons and trimmings, called in Germany Bandmlihle, 
Schnurmiihle, and Miihlenstuhl, These machines were in- 
vented in Germany. Abbe' Lancellotti, in a work that ap- 
peared in Venice in 1036, but which was written in 1579, says 
as follows : " Anthony Miiller of Danzig, saw about 50 years 
ago in that town, a very ingenious machine, which weaves 4 to 
o' pieces at once. But the Mayor being apprehensive that this 

cusable levity of some of the accidents; su h, for instance, as the loss of a fli 
being a trifling matter. A working-man's living and prospects depend so much upon 
his fingers, that any loss of them is a very serious matter to him. When I have heard 
such inconsiderate remarks made, I have usually put this question : Suppose you 
were in want of an additional workman, and two were to apply, both equally irell 
qualified in other respects, but one had lost a thumb or a forefinger, which would 
you engage? There never was a hesitation as to tho answer." .... The manufac- 
turer! have " miataketi prejudice! against what they have heard repres e nted as a 
pseudo philanthropic legislation." (" Rep. of Insp. of Fact. , 31st Oct., 1£ Th M 

manufacturer! are clever folk, and not without reason were they enthusiastic for tho 
slave -holders' rebellion. 
1 In those factorial that have been Longest subject to the Factory Acts, with their 

compulsory limitation of the homs of lahour, and other regulations, many of the 
old r abusei nave vanished. The very improvement of the machinery demands to a 

■ 1 1 tain extent " improved construction of the buildings," and this is an advantage to 
the workpeople. (Bee M Etep. of [nap. of Pact, for 81st Oct., L863," p. 1 01). ) 

'Bee amongst others, .John Eoughton: "Husbandry and Trade Improved. Lonv 
d..n, 1727." "The Advantages of the Bast India Trade, 1720." John Boilers, 1. a. 
"The masfe n and thi ii ivorkmen are, unhappily, in a pei petusJ sraf with each other 
The Invariable object of the foi met Ii to get then wm k done as i beaply a» possible ; 
and they do not fail to employ every artifloe to thi< purpose, whilst the hitter nro 

■ qually attentive to every occasion of distressing their mast< ii Into a oompliam i vita 

higher demands." (" An inquiry into the (!ausos of tin- Present lli^h I'm • * <•! I'd 

ins," p. 'ii 82. Author, t li ■ \i- 1 Nathaniel Poretor, quite on the aids oi kha 

workmen.) 



4-8 Capitalist Production. 

invention miidit throw a large number of workmen on the 
streets, caused the inventor to be secretly strangled or 
drowned." In Leyden, this machine was not used till 1629; 
there the riots of the ribbon-weavers at length compelled the 
Town Council to prohibit it. " In hac urbe," says Boxhorn 
(Inst. Pol., 1GG3), referring to the introduction of this machine 
into Leyden, " ante hos viginti circiter annos instrumentum 
quidam invenerunt textorium, quo solus plus panni et facilius 
conficere poterat, quam plures aequali tempore. Hinc turbse 
ortai et querulaa textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti 
a magistrate prohibitus est." After making various decrees 
more or less prohibitive against this loom in 1G32, 16S9, &c., 
the States General of Holland at length permuted it to be 
used, under certain conditions, by the decree of the 15th De- 
cember, 1GG1. It was also prohibited in Cologne in 1G7G, at 
the same time that its introduction into England was causing 
disturbances among the workpeople. By an imperial Edict of 
19th Feb., 1G85, its use was forbidden throughout all Germany. 
In Hamburg it was burnt in public by order of the Senate. 
The Emperor Charles VI., on 9th Feb., 1719, renewed the edict 
of 1G85, and not till 17G5 was its use openly allowed in the 
Electorate of Saxony. This machine, which shook Europe to 
its foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule and the 
power-loom, and of the industrial revolution of the 18th cen- 
tury. It enabled a totally inexperienced boy, to set the whole 
loom with all its shuttles in motion, by simply moving a rod 
backwards and forwards, and in its improved form produced 
from 40 to 50 pieces at once. 

About 1G30, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a 
Dutchman, succumbed to the excesses of the populace. Even 
as late as the beginning of the 18th century, sawmills driven 
by water overcame the opposition of the people, supported as 
it was by parliament, only with great difficulty. No sooner 
had Everet in 1758 erected the first wool-shearing machine 
that was driven b} 7 water-power, than it was set on fire by 
100,000 people who had been thrown out of work. Fifty 
thousand workpeople, who had previously lived by carding 
wool, petitioned parliament against Arkwright's scribbling 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 429 

mills and carding engines. The enormous destruction of 
machinery that occurred in the English manufacturing dis- 
tricts during the first 15 years of this century, chiefly caused 
by the employment of the power-loom, and known as the 
Luddite movement, gave the anti-jacobin governments of a 
Sidmouth, a Castlereagh, and the like, a pretext for the most 
re-actionary and forcible measures. It took both time and 
experience before the workpeople learnt to distinguish between 
machinery and its employment by capital, and to direct their 
attacks, not against the material instruments of production, 
but against the mode in which they are used. 1 

The contests about wages in Manufacture, presuppose manu- 
facture, and are in no sense directed against its existence. The 
opposition against the establishment of new manufactures, pro- 
ceeds from the guilds and privileged towns, not from the work- 
people. Hence the writers of the manufacturing period treat 
the division of labour chiefly as a means of virtually supplying 
a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of actually dis- 
placing those in work. This distinction is self-evident. If it be 
said that 100 millions of people would be required in England 
to spin with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun 
with mules by 500,000 people, this does not mean that the mules 
took the place of those millions who never existed. It means 
only this, that many millions of workpeople would be required 
t'> replace the spinning machinery. If, on the other band, we 
say, that in England the power-loom threw 800,000 weavers 
on the streets, we do not refer to existing machinery, that 
would have to be replaced by a definite number of work- 
people, but to a number of weavers in existence who w 

tally replaced or displaced by the looms. During the manu- 
facturing period, handicraft labour, altered though it was by 
division of labour, was yet, the basis. The demands of 
new colonial markets could not be satisfied <'\\ii"_r to the 

Lively small number of town operatives handed down <i 
the middle and the manufactures proper opened ">it new 

• [nold fashioned nuurafaetarei the rorolti <>f tht workpeople 04 ehtaerj, 

i'wii t.i this ii.iy, oeoaeioneJlj eeium 
Qeld !':!<• cotton in ! 



43° Capitalist Production. 

Holds of production to the rural population, driven from the 
land by the dissolution of the feudal system. At that time, 
therefore, division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, 
were viewed more from the positive aspect, that they made 
the workpeople more productive. 1 Long before the period of 
Modern Industry, co-operation and the concentration of the 
instruments of labour in the hands of a few, gave rise, in 
numerous countries where these methods were applied in agri- 
culture, to great, sudden and forcible revolutions in the modes 
of production, and consequentially, in the conditions of exist- 
ence, and the means of employment of the rural populations. 
But this contest at first takes place more between the large 
and the small landed proprietors, than between capital and 
wage-labour ; on the other hand, when the labourers are dis- 
placed by the instruments of labour, by sheep, horses, &c, in 
this case force is directly resorted to in the first instance as the 
prelude to the industrial revolution. The labourers are first 
driven from the land, and then come the sheep. Land grabbing 
on a great, scale, such as was perpetrated in England, is the 
first step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture 
on a great scale. Hence this subversion of agriculture puts on, 
at first, more the appearance of a political revolution. 

The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a 
machine, immediately becomes a competitor of the workman 
himself. 1 " The self-expansion of capital by means of machinery 
is thenceforward directly proportional to the number of the 
workpeople, whose means of livelihood have been destroyed by 

1 Sir James Stewart also understands machinery quite in this sense. " Je con- 
sidcre done les machines comme des moyens d'augmenter (virtuellement) le nombre 
des gens industrieux qu'on n'est pas oblige de nourrir. . . . En quoi l'effet d'une 
machine differe-t-il de celui de nouveaux habitants?" (French trans, t. I., 1. I., ch. 
XIX.) More naive is Petty, who says, it replaces "Polygamy." The above point 
of view is, at the most, admissible only for some parts of the United States. On the 
other hand, " machinery can seldom be used with success to abridge the labour of an 
individual; more time wo dd be lost in its construction than could be saved by its 
application. It is only really useful when it acts on great masses, when a single 
machine can assist the work of thousands. It is accordingly in the most populous 
countries, where there are most idle men, that it is most abundant. ... It is not 
called into use by a scarcity of men, but by the facility with which they can be brought 
to work in masses." (Piercy Ravenstone : " Thoughts on the Funding System and its 
Effects." London, 1824, p. 15.) 

* " Machinery and labour are in constant competition." Ricardo, 1. c, p. 479. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 43 1 

that machinery. The whole system of capitalist production is 
based on the fact that the workman sells his labour-power as a 
commodity. Division of labour specialises this labour-power, 
by reducing it to skill in handling a particular tool. So soon 
as the handling of this tool becomes the work of a machine, 
then, with the use-value, the exchange-value too, of the work- 
man's labour-power vanishes ; the workman becomes unsale- 
able, like paper money thrown out of currency by legal enact- 
ment. That portion of the working class, thus by machinery 
rendered superfluous, i.e., no longer immediately necessary for 
the self-expansion of capital, either goes to the wall in the 
unequal contest of the old handicrafts and manufactures with 
machinery, or else floods all the more easily accessible branches 
of industry, swamps the labour market, and sinks the price of 
labour-power below its value. It is impressed upon the work- 
people, as a great consolation, first, that their sufferings are 
only temporary ("a temporary inconvenience"), secondly, that 
machinery acquires the mastery over the whole of a given field 
of production, only by degrees, so that the extent and intensity 
of its destructive effect is diminished. The first consolation 
neutralizes the second. When machinery seizes on an industry 
by degrees, it produces chronic misery among the operatives 
who compete with it. Where the transition is rapid, the effect 
is acute and felt by great masses. History discloses no tragedy 
more horrible than the gradual extinction of the English hand- 
loom weavers,an extinction that was spread over several decades. 
and finally sealed in 1838. Many of them died of starvation, 
many with families vegetated for a long time on 2U\. a daj 
On the other hand, the English cotton machinery produced an 

1 The competition between hand-weaving and power-weaving in England, before 

the passing of tin: Poor Law of 1883, was prolonged by supplementing the \\ 

which had fallen considerably below the minimum, with parish relief. "The Etei 

Mr. Turner was, in L827, rector of Wihnslow, in Cheshire, • manufacturing district 

The questions of the Committee of Emigration, and Mr. Tunni's answers, show how 

tlio competition of human labour is maintained against machinery. Question: II • 
eot the use of the power-loom superseded the use of the hand loom! Answer: I 
doubtetlly ; it would have superseded them muoh more than it has done, if the band 
loom wi'nvi is were not enabled to lubmil to s reduction of wages. Question : ' B 

In submitting he has SOOepted wages whieh are insulin lent to lUpDOrt him, Snd louki 

to parochial contribution as the remainder of his rapport! I I in 

fact the competition between the band*loom and the power loom • I out 



43 2 Capitalist Production. 

acute effect in India. The Governor General reported 1834-'].") . 
" The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of com- 
merce. The bones of the cotton- weavers are bleaching the 
plains of India." No doubt, in turning them out of this 
" temporal " world, the machinery caused them no more than 
" a temporary inconvenience." For the re.^t, since machinery 
is continually seizing upon new fields of production, its tem- 
porary effect is really permanent. Hence, the character of 
iudependance and estrangement which the capitalist mode of 
production as a whole gives to the instruments of labour and 
to the product, as against the workman, is developed by means 
of machinery into a thorough antagonism. 1 Therefore, it is 
with the advent of machinery, that the workman for the first 
time brutally revolts against the instruments of labour. 

The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer. This 
direct antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, 
whenever newly introduced machinery competes with handi- 
crafts or manufactures, handed down from former times. But 
even in Modern Industry the continual improvement of 
machinery, and the development of the automatic system, has 
an analogous effect. " The object of improved machinery is to 
diminish manual labour, to provide for the performance of a 
process or the completion of a link in a manufacture by the 
aid of an iron instead of the human apparatus." 2 "The 
adaptation of power to machinery heretofore moved by hand, 
is almost of daily occurrence . . . the minor improvements in 

of the poor-rates.' Thus degrading pauperism or expatriation, is the benefit which 
the industrious receive from the introduction of machinery, to be reduced from the 
respectable and in some degree independent mechanic, to the cringing wretch who 
lives on the debasing bread of charity. This they call a temporary inconvenience." 
(" A Prize Essay on the comparative merits of Competition and Co-operation." 
Lond., 1834, p. 2!).) 

1 "The same cause which may increase the revenue of the country" (i.e., as 
Ricardo explains in the same passage, the revenues of landlords and capitalists, whose 
wealth, from the economical point of view, forms the Wealth of the Nation), " may 
at the same time render the population redundant and deteriorate the condition of 
the labourer." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 4(Ji)). "The constant aim and the tendency of every 
improvement in machinery is, in fact, to do a *ay entirely with the labour of man, or 
t > lessen its price by substituting the labour of women and children for that of grown- 
up men, or of unskilled for that of skilled workmen." (Ure. 1. c, t. I., p. 35). 

2 "Rep. Insp, Fact, for 31st October, 1858," p. 43. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 433 

machinery having for their object economy of power, the pro- 
duction of better work, the turning off more work in the same 
time, or in supplying the place of a child, a female, or a man, 
are constant, and although sometimes apparently of no great 
moment, have somewhat important results." x " Whenever a 
process requires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is 
withdrawn, as soon as possible, from the cunning workman, 
who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is placed 
in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self-regulating that a 
child can superintend it." 2 "On the automatic plan skilled 
labour gets progressively superseded." 3 " The effect of im- 
provements in machinery, not merely in superseding the 
necessity for the employment of the same quantity of adult 
labour as before, in order to produce a given result, but in 
substituting one description of human labour for another, the 
less skilled for the more skilled, juvenile for adult, female for 
male, causes a fresh disturbance in the rate of wages." 4 " The 
effect of substituting the self-acting mule for the common mule, 
is to discharge the greater part of the men spinners, and to retain 
adolescents and children." 5 The extraordinary power of expan- 
sion of the factory system owing to accumulated practical ex- 
perience, to the mechanical means at hand, and to constant tech- 
nical progress, was proved to us by the giant strides of thatsystem 
under the pressure of a shortened working day. But who, in 
I860, the Zenith year of the English cotton industry, would 
have dreamt of the galloping improvements in machinery, and 
the corresponding displacement of working people, called 
into being during the following 3 years, under the stimulus of 

1 " Rep. [up. Fact, forest October, 1866," p. L5. 

2 Ure, 1. c, p. 19. "The great advantage of the machinery employed in hrirk- 
making consists in this, that tin- employe] is mails entirely independent of skilici 
labourer*" ("Oh. BmpL Comm. V. Report," Lond., 1866, p. 180, n. 16.) Mr. a. 
Sturrock, luperintendent of the machine department <>t" theQreal Northern Railway, 
Hays, with regard t<> the building of Locomotives, em. : "Expensive English workmen 
are being L< 1 used every day. The produotion of the workshops of England is being 
Increased by the use of Unproved tooli ami these tools are a^ain sci veil i>\ a U>w 
labour . . . Formerly their skilled labour Qeoessai lly produoed all the parts of en| 
N"w the parti <>t enginei arc produoed l>y laboui with less skill, but with good I 

'">ls, 1 mean engineer'! machinery, latins, plowing msohinft, drills, and soon, 
(" Royal Com. on Railways. ' Lond , l 4i7, Uinuti I . lenoe, u. 17,802 and 17. 
• Uro, 1. c, i». 20. * Ure, 1. c, p. 8SL s I n ■ 1. 1 

2l 



434 Capitalist Production. 

the American Civil War? A couple of examples from the 
Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will suffice on this point. 
A Manchester manufacturer states: "We formerly had 75 card- 
ing engines, now we have 12, doing the same quantity of work . . 
We are doing with fewer hands by 14, at a saving in wages of 
£10 a-week. Our estimated saving in waste is about 10 °/ o 
in the quantity of cotton consumed." " In another fine spinning 
mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased 
speed and the adoption of some self-acting processes, a reduc- 
tion had been made, in number, of a fourth in one department, 
and of above half in another, and that the introduction of the 
combing machine in place of the second carding, had consider- 
ably reduced the number of hands formerly employed in the 
carding-room." Another spinning mill is estimated to effect a 
saving of labour of 10 %. The Messrs. Gilmour, spinners at 
Manchester, state : " In our blowing-room department we con- 
sider our expense with new machinery is fully one-third less 
in wages and hands ... in the jack-frame and drawing-frame 
room, about one-third less in expense, and likewise one-third less 
in hands; in the spinning-room about one-third less in expenses. 
But this is not all ; when our yarn goes to the manufacturers, it 
is so much better by the application of our new machinery, that 
they will produce a greater quantity of cloth, and cheaper than 
from the yarn produced by old machinery." 1 Mr. Redgrave 
further remarks in the same Report : " The reduction of hands 
against increased production is, in fact, constantly taking place ; 
in woollen mills the reduction commenced some time since, and 
is continuing ; a few days since, the master of a school in the 
neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that the great falling 
off in the girls' school is not only caused by the distress, but by 
the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in consequence 
of which a reduction of 70 short-timers had taken place." 

1 "Rep. Insp. Fact., 31st Oct., 18G3,"pp. 108, 101). 

2 1. c, p. 109. The rapid improvement of machinery, during the crisis, allowed the 
English manufacturers, immediately after the termination of the American civil war, 
and almost in no time, to glut the markets of the world again. Cloth, during the 
last six months of 1SGG, was almost unsaleable. Thereupon began the consignment 
of goods to India and China, thus naturally making the glut more intense. At the 
oeginning of 18G7 the manufacturers resorted to their usual way out of the difficulty, 
viz., reducing wajes 5 per cent. The workpeople resisted, and said that the only 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 435 



The following table shows the total result of the mechanical 
improvements in the English cotton industry due to the 
American civil war. 

NUMBER OF FACTORIES. 

1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 2,046 2,715 2,405 

Scotland 152 163 131 

Ireland 12 9 13 

United Kingdom 2,210 2,887 2,549 

NUMBER OF POWER-LOOMS. 

1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 275,590 368,125 344,719 

Scotland 21,624 30,110 31,864 

Ireland 1,633 1,757 2,746 

United Kingdom 298,847 399,992 379,329 

NUMBER OF SPINDLES. 

1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 25,818,576 28,352,152 30,478,228 

Scotland 2,041,129 1,915,398 1,397,546 

Ireland 150,512 119,944 124,240 

United Kingdom 28,010,217 30,387,494 32,000,014 

NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED. 

1858 1861 1868 

England and Wales 341,170 407,598 357,052 

Scotland 34,698 41,237 39,809 

Ireland 3,345 2,734 4*203 

United Kingdom 379,213 451,569 401,061 

Hence, between 18G1 and 18G8, 338 cotton factories disap- 
peared, in other words more productive machinery on a larger 
scale was concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of 
capitalists. The number of power-looms decreased by 2(),(!(i*>. 
but since their product increased in the same period, an im- 
proved loom must have yielded more than an old one. Lastly 
the number of spindles increased by 1,612,541, while the 
number of operatives decreased by 50,505. The " temporary ' 
misery, inflicted on the workpeople by the cotton-crisis, waa 
heightened, and from being temporary made permanent, by th< 
rapid and persistent progress of machinery. 

remedy \v;ih to work nhort time, 4 dayt» a-week ; and their theory was tin oORWi 
MA After holding out for soiim tim< I, the self ejected captain* of industry had lo 
make up their miadl to hhort time, with reduced wages in some placea, ami in otill r» 
without. 



436 Capitalist Production. 

But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the 
better of the workman, and is constantly on the point of 
making him superfluous. It is also a power inimical to him, 
and as such capital proclaims it from the roof tops and as such 
makes use of it. It is the most powerful weapon for repress- 
ing strikes, those periodical revolts of the working class against 
the autocracy of capital. 1 According to Gaskcll, the steam 
engine was from the very first an antagonist of human power, 
an antagonist that enabled the capitalist to tread under foot 
the growing claims of the workmen, who threatened the newly 
born factory system with a crisis. 2 It would be possible to 
write quite a histo:y of the inventions, made since 1830, for 
the sole purpose of supplying capital with weapons against the 
revolts of the working class. At the head of these in import- 
ance, stands the self-acting mule, because it opened up a new 
epoch in the automatic system. 3 

Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam hammer, gives the 
following evidence before the Trades Union Commission, with 
regard to the improvements made by him in machinery and 
introduced in consequence of the wide-spread and long strikes 
of the engineers in 1851. "The characteristic feature of our 
modern mechanical improvements, is the introduction of self- 
acting tool machinery. What every mechanical workman has 
now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work himself 
but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine. The 
whole class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, 
is now done away with. Formerly, I employed four boys to 
every mechanic. Thanks to these new mechanical com- 
binations, I have reduced the number of grown-up men from 
1500 to 750. The result was a considerable increase in my 
profits." 

Ure says of a machine used in calico printing : " At length 

1 "The relation of master and man in the blown-flint bottle trades amounts to a 
chronic strike." Hence the impetus given to the manufacture of pressed glass, in 
which the chief operations are done by machinery. One firm in Newcastle, who 
formerly produced 350,000 lbs. of blown-flint glass, now produces in its place 3 000,500 
lbs. of pressed glass. (" Ch Empl. Comm., Fourth Rep.,'' 1865, pp. 262, 2bo.) 

2 Gaskell. " The Manufacturing Population of England. London, 1833," pp. 3, 4. 

3 W. Fairbairn discovered several very important applications of machinery to the 
construction of machines, in consequence of strikes in his own workshops. 



Machine7y and Modem Industry. 437 

capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable bondage" 
[namely the, in their eyes, burdensome terms of their contracts 
with the workmen] " in the resources of science, and were 
speedily re-instated in their legitimate rule, that of the head 
over the inferior members." Speaking of an invention for 
dressing warps : " Then the combined malcontents, who fancied 
themselves impregnably intrenched behind the old lines of 
division of labour, found their flanks turned and their defences 
rendered useless by the new mechanical tactics, and were 
obliged to surrender at discretion." With regard to the in- 
vention of the self-acting mule, he says: "A creation destined 
to restore order among the industrious classes. . . . This 
invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that 
when capital enlists science into her service, the refractory 
hand of labour will alwa} T s be taught docility." 1 Although 
Ure's work appeared 30 years ago, at a time when the factory 
system was comparatively but little developed, it still perfectly 
expresses the spirit of the factory, not only by its undisguised 
cynicism, but also by the naivete' with which it blurts out the 
stupid contradictions of the capitalist brain. For instance, 
after propounding the " doctrine " stated above, that capital, 
with the aid of science taken into its pay, always reduces the 
refractory hand of labour to docility, he grows indignant be- 
cause "it (physico-mechanical science) has been accused of 
lending itself to the rich capitalist as an instrument for 
1 (.massing the poor." After preaching a long sermon to show 
how advantageous the rapid development of machinery is to 
(he working classes, he warns them, that by their obstinacy 
and their strikes they hasten that development. " Violenl re- 
vulsions of this nature," he says, " display short-sighted man in 
the contemptible character of a self-tormentor." A few pages 
before he states the contrary. "Had it Dol been for the 
violent collisions and Interruptions resulting from erroneous 
views among the factory operatives, the factory system would 
have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all 
concerned." Then h<- exclaims again : " Fortunately for 
statj of society in the cotton districts of Great Britain, the 

1 In, 1. 0., pp, 30 ;''7U. 



438 Capitalist Production. 

improvements in machinery are gradual." "It " (improvement 
in machinery) " is said to lower the rate of earnings of adults 
by displacing a portion of them, and thus rendering their 
number superabundant as compared with the demand for their 
labour. It certainly augments the demand for the labour of 
children and increases the rate of their wages." On the 
other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the 
lowness of the children's wages on the ground that it pre- 
vents parents from sending their children at too early an age 
into the factory. The whole of his book is a vindication of a 
working day of unrestricted length ; that Parliament should 
forbid children of 13 years to be exhausted by working 12 
hours a day, reminds his liberal soul of the darkest days of the 
middle ages. This does not prevent him from calling upon the 
factory operatives to thank Providence, who by means of 
machinery has given them the leisure to think of their 
* immortal interests." l 

SECTION 6. — THE THEORY OF COMPENSATION AS REGARDS THE WORK- 
PEOPLE DISPLACED BY MACHINERY. 

James Mill, MacCulloch, Torrens, Senior, John Stuart Mill, 
and a whole series besides, of bourgeois political economists, 
insist that all machinery that displaces workmen, simul- 
taneously and necessarily sets free an amount of capital 
adequate to employ the same identical workmen. 8 

Suppose a capitalist to employ 100 workmen, at £30 a year 
each, in a carpet factory. The variable capital annually 
laid out amounts, therefore, to £3000. Suppose, also, that he 
discharges 50 of his workmen, and employs the remaining 50 
with machinery that costs him £1500. To simplify matters, 
we take no account of buildings, coal, &c. Further suppose 
that the raw material annually consumed costs £3000, both 
before and after the change. 3 Is any capital set free by this 

» Ure, 1. c. pp. 3G8, 7, 370, 280, 321, 281, 370, 475. 

* Ricardo originally was also of this opinion, but afterwards expressly disclaimed 
it, with the scientific impartiality and love of truth characteristic of him. See Lc. 
oh. xxxi. "On Machinery." 

3 Nota bent. My illustratiou is entirely on the lines of those given by the above 
imiued economist*. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 439 

metamorphosis ? Before the change, the total sum of £600(1 
consisted half of constant, and half of variable capital. After 
the change it consists of £4500 constant (£3000 raw material 
and £1500 machinery), and £1500 variable capital. The vari- 
able capital, instead of being one half, is only one quarter, of the 
total capital. Instead of being set free, a part of the capital 
is here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged 
against labour-power : variable has been changed into constant 
capital. Other things remaining unchanged, the capital of 
£6000, can, in future, employ no more than 50 men. With 
each improvement in the machinery, it will employ fewer. If 
the newly introduced machinery had cost less than did the 
labour-power and implements displaced by it, if, for instance, 
instead of costing £1500, it had cost only £1000, a variable 
capital of £1000 would have been converted into constant 
capital, and locked up ; and a capital of £500 would have been 
set free. The latter sum, supposing wages unchanged, would 
form a fund sufficient to employ about 16 out of the 50 men 
discharged ; nay, less than 16, for, in order to be employed as 
capital, a part of this £500 must now become constant capital, 
thus leaving only the remainder to be laid out in labour- 
power. 

But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new 
machinery affords employment to a greater number of 
mechanics, can that be called compensation to the carpet 
makers, thrown on the streets ? At the best, its construction 
employs fewer men than its employment displaces. The sum 
of £1500 that formerly represented the wages of the discharged 
carpet-makers, now represents in the shape of machinery: (1) 
the value of the means of production used in the construction 
of that machinery, (2) the wages of the mechanics employed in 
its construction, and (3) the surplus-value falling to the Bhare 
of their "master." Further, the machinery need not be re 
newed till it is worn out. Hence, in order to keep the in- 
creased number of mechanics in constant employment, on.' 
carpet manufacturer after another must displace workmen l>y 
machines. 

As a matter of fact, the apologists do not mean tin- >orl >t 



44° Capitalist Production. 

setting free. They have in their minds the means of sub- 
sistence of the liberated workpeople. It cannot be denied, in 
the above instance, that the machinery not only liberates 50 
men, thus placing them at others' disposal, but, at the same time, 
it withdraws from their consumption, and sets free, means of 
subsistence to the value of £1500. The simple fact, by no 
means a new one, that machinery cuts off the workmen from 
their means of subsistence is, therefore, in economical parlance 
tantamount to this, that machinery liberates means of sub- 
sistence for the workman, or converts those means into capital 
for his employment. The mode of expression, you see, is 
everything. Nominibus mollire licet mala. 

This theory implies that the £1500 worth of means of sub- 
sistence was capital that was being expanded by the labour of 
the 50 men discharged. That, consequently, this capital falls 
out of employment so soon as they commence their forced 
holidays, and never rests till it has found a fresh investment, 
where it can again be productively consumed by these same 50 
men. That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the 
workmen must come together again, and that, then, the com- 
pensation is complete. That the sufferings of the workmen 
displaced by machinery are therefore as transient as are the 
riches of this world. 

In relation to the discharged workmen, the £1500 worth of 
means of subsistence never was capital. What really con- 
fronted them as capital, was the sum of £1500, afterwards laid 
out in machinery. On looking closer it will be seen that this 
sum represented part of the carpets produced in a year by the 
50 discharged men, which part they received as wages from 
their employer in money instead of in kind. With the carpets 
in the form of money, they bought means of subsistence to the 
value of £1500. These means, therefore, were to them, not 
capital, but commodities, and they, as regards these commo- 
dities, were not wage-labourers, but buyers. The circumstance 
that they were " freed " by the machinery, from the means of 
purchase, changed them from buyers into non-buyers. Hence 
a lessened demand for those commodities — voila tout. If this 
diminution be not compensated by an increase from some other 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 441 

quarter, the market price of tiie commodities falls. If this state of 
things lasts for some time, and extends, there follows a discharge 
of workmen employed in the production of these commodities. 
Some of the capital that was previously devoted to production 
of necessary means of subsistence, has to become reproduced in 
another form. While prices fall, and capital is being displaced, 
the labourers employed in the production of necessary means of 
subsistence are in their turn "freed" from a part of their wages. 
Instead, therefore, of proving that, when machinery frees the 
workman from his means of subsistence, it simultaneously con- 
verts those means into capital for his further employment, our 
apologists, with their cut-and-dried law of supply and demand, 
prove, on the contrary, that machinery throws workmen on the 
streets, not only in that branch of production in which it is in- 
troduced, but also in those branches in which it is not introduced. 
The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of 
economists, are as follows : The labourers, when driven out of 
the workshop by the machinery, are thrown upon the labour 
market, and there add to the number of workmen at the dis- 
posal of the capitalists. In Part VII. of this book it will be 
seen that this effect of machinery, which, as we have seen, is 
represented to be a compensation to the working class, is on 
the contrary a most frightful scourge. For the present I will 
0. ly say this: The labourers that are thrown out of work in 
any branch of industry, can no doubt seek for employment in 
-uine other branch. If they find it, and thus renew the bond 
between them and the means of subsistence, this takes pla< 
only by the Intermediary of ;i uew and additional capital that 
is seeking investment; not at all by the intermediary of the 
capital that formerly employed them and was afterwards con- 
verted into machinery. Ami even should the)- find employment, 
what a poor look-out is theirs! Crippled as they are by divi- 
sion of labour, these poor devils are w orth so little out side their 
old trade, that they cannot find admission Into any industrii . 
except a few of Inferior kind, that are over-supplied with 

underpaid workmen. 1 Further, every branch of industry 

1 A iliscij.].- of EtiOMdo, iii answer to the i r 1 s i j . i . I i t i , h of J. B. Say. i< m;nks on llii*- 
point: "Where division of labour xa well developed, the lUll of the IftbOttTtf i» 



44 2 Capitalist Production. 

attracts each year a new stream of men, who furnish a con- 
tingent from which to fill up vacancies, and to draw a supply 
for expansion. So soon as machinery sets free a part of the 
workmen employed in a given branch of industry, the reserve 
men are also diverted into new channels of employment, and 
become absorbed in other branches ; meanwhile the original 
victims, during the period of transition, for the most part starve 
and perish. 

It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not re- 
sponsible for " setting free " the workman from the means of 
subsistence. It cheapens and increases production in that 
branch which it seizes on, and at first makes no change in the 
mass of the means of subsistence produced in other branches. 
Hence, after its introduction, the society possesses as much, if 
not more, of the necessaries of life than before, for the labourers 
thrown out of work ; and that quite apart from the enormous 
share of the annual produce wasted by the non-workers. And 
this is the point relied on by our apologists ! The contradic- 
tions and antagonisms inseparable from the capitalist employ- 
ment of machinery, do not exist, they say, since they do not 
arise out of machinery, as such, but out of its capitalist:, em- 
ployment ! Since therefore machinery, considered alone, 
shortens the hours of labour, but, when in the service of capital, 
lengthens them ; since in itself it lightens labour, but when 
employed by capital, heightens the intensity of labour ; since 
in itself it is a victory of man over the forces of nature, but in 
the hav.ds of capital, makes man the slave of those forces ; 
since in itself it increases the wealth of the producers, but in 
the hands of capital, makes them paupers — for all these reasons 
and others besides, says the bourgeois economist without more 
ado, it is clear as noonday that all these contradictions are a 
mere semblance of the reality, and that, as a matter of fact, 
they have neither an actual nor a theoretical existence. Thus 

available only in that particular branch in which it has been acquired ; he himself is 
a sort of machine. It does not therefore help matters one jot, to repeat in parrot 
fashion, that things have a tendency to find their level. On looking around us we 
cannot but see, that they are unable to find their level for a longtime; and that when 
they do find it, the level is always lower than at the commencement of the process.' 
("An Inquiry into those Principles respecting the Nature of Demand," <kc. Lond. 
1821, p. 72.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 443 

he saves himself from all further puzzling of the brain, and 
what is more, implicitly declares his opponent to be stupid 
enough to contend against, not the capitalistic employment of 
machinery, but machinery itself. 

No doubt he is far from denying that temporary incon- 
venience may result from the capitalist use of machinery. But 
where is the medal without its reverse ! Any emplo} 7 ment 
of machinery, except by capital, is to him an impossibility. 
Exploitation of the workman by the machine is therefore, with 
him, identical with exploitation of the machine by the work- 
man. Whoever, therefore, exposes the real state of things in 
the capitalistic employment of machinery, is against its em- 
ployment in any way, and is an enemy of social progress I 1 
Exactly the reasoning of the celebrated Bill Sykes. " Gentle- 
men of the jury, no doubt the throat of this commercial 
traveller has been cut. But that is not my fault, it is the fault 
of the knife ? Must we, for such a temporary inconvenience, 
abolish the use of the knife ? Only consider ! where would 
agriculture and trade be without the knife ? Is it not as 
salutary in surgery, as it is knowing in anatomy ? And in 
addition a willing help at the festive board ? If you abolish 
the knife — you hurl us back into the depths of barbarism." 

Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in 
those industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, not- 
withstanding this, bring about an increase of employment in 
other industries. This effect, however, has nothing in common 
with the so-called theory of compensation. Since every article 
produced by a machine is cheaper than a similar article pro- 
duced by hand, we deduce the following infallible law : If the 
total quantity of the article produced by machinery, be equal 

1 MacCulloch, amongst others, is a past master in this pretention! cretinism 
11 If," he says, with the affected naivete of a child of S years, M if it he a.lv.i 

to develope the skill of the workmen more and more, so that be ia oepeblc of prodno 

ing, with the same or with i less <|iiantity of lahour, a constantly Lnoroeeing quantity 

of commodities, it must ni 10 hi- edventegeoue, that he should avail bimeelf of the help 

of sue h maohinerj as will assist him most effectively In the attainment of this result. "* 

(MeoOullooh : " Princ of Pol Boon.," Loud. L830, i>. 166). 

,J "The inventor of the spinning machine has ruined India, a fact, however, that 
touches us but little. " A. Thiers : I>e la propriete. M. Thiers here confounds tho 
■pinning machine with thu power loom, "a fact, however, that touches U hut 

little." 



444 Capitalist Production. 

to the total quantity of the article previously produced by a 
handicraft or by manufacture, and now made by machinery, 

then the total labour expended is diminished. The new labour 
spent on the instruments of labour, on the machinery, on the 
coal, and so on, must necessarily be less than the labour dis- 
placed by the use of the machinery ; otherwise the product of 
the machine would be as dear, or dearer, than the product of 
the manual labour. But, as a matter of fact, the total quantity 
of the article produced by machinery with a diminished num- 
ber of workmen, instead of remaining equal to, by far exceeds 
the total quantity of the hand-made article that has been dis- 
placed. Suppose that 400,000 yards of cloth have been pro- 
duced on power-looms by fewer weavers than could weave 
100,000 yards by hand. In the quadrupled product there lies 
four times as much raw material. Hence the production of 
raw material must be quadrupled. But as regards the instru- 
ments of labour, such as buildings, coal, machinery, and so on, 
it is different ; the limit up to which the additional labour 
required for their production can increase, varies with the 
difference between the quantity of the machine-made article, 
and the quantity of the same article that the same number of 
workmen could make by hand. 

Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, 
the immediate effect is to increase production in the other in- 
dustries that furnish the first with means of production. How 
far employment is thereby found for an increased number of 
men, depends, given the length of the working-day and the 
intensit}' of labour, on the composition of the capital employed, 
i.e., on the ratio of its constant to its variable component. This 
ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with the extent to which 
machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing on, those 
trades. The number of the men condemned to work in coal 
;tnd metal mines increased enormously owing to the progress 
of the English factory system ; but during the last few decades 
this increase of number has been less rapid, owing to the use 
of new machinery in mining. 1 A new type of workman springs 

1 According to the census of 18G1 (Vol. II., Lond., 1863), the number of people 
employed in coal mines in England and Wales, amounted to 24(?,G13, of which 73,045 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 445 

into life along with the machine, namely, its maker. We have 
already learnt that machinery has possessed itself even of this 
branch of production on a scale that grows greater every day. 1 
As to raw material, 2 there is not the least doubt that the 
rapid strides of cotton spinning, not only pushed on with 
tropical luxuriance the growth of cotton in the United States, 
and with it the African slave trade, but also made the breed- 
ing of slaves the chief business of the border slave-states. 
When, in 1790, the first census of slaves was taken in the 
United States, their number was GOT, 000 ; in 1801 it had 
nearly reached four millions. On the other hand, it is no less 
certain that the rise of the English woollen factories, together 
with the gradual conversion of arable land into sheep pasture, 
brought about the superfluity of agricultural labourers that 
led to their being driven in masses into the towns. Ireland, 
having during the last twenty years reduced its population by 
nearly one half, is at this moment undergoing the process of 
still further reducing the number of its inhabitants, so as 
exactly to suit the requirements of its landlords and of the 
English woollen manufacturers. 

When machinery is applied to any of the preliminary or 
intermediate stages through which the Bubject of labour has 
to pass on its way to completion, there is an increased yield 
of materia] in those stages, and simultaneously an increased 
demand for labour in the handicrafts <>r manufactures supplied 
by tin- produce uf the machines. Spinning by machinery, for 

example, supplied yarn so cheaply and BO abundantly that the 

ender, and ir:i,<>i;7 u. • of those under 20, B36 ireri 

B ami in j en 10 and 15 years, 12,010 between 15 and ' Ths 

Dumber employed in iron, ooppei tin, and othei minei of every description, 

519,222. 
■in England and Wales, in 186% there were employed in making maohin 
, including the i tnd theii ol . also al 

nneoted with thi ry, l>wt excluding the makeri ol *m:ill 

the makeri of the op 
of machines, Much as ipindles. The total aumbei of elvll engineer! amounted to 

1 Since iron is one of the most important raw materials, let me here itate th 
I there were in I i and Walei 125,771 operative Iron found 

re mali •, 2841 f< males, I H the form and< r, ai 

on i 20 y 



446 Capitalist Production. 

hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time with- 
out increased outlay. Their earnings accordingly rose. 1 Hence 
a flow of people into the cotton-weaving trade, till at length 
the 800,000 weavers, called into existence by the Jenny, the 
throstle and the mule, were overwhelmed by the power-loom. 
So also, owing to the abundance of clothing materials produced 
by machinery, the number of tailors, seamstresses and needle- 
women, went on increasing until the appearance of the sewing 
machine. 

In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively 
small number of workpeople, increases the mass of raw 
materials, intermediate products, instruments of labour, &c. } 
the working-up of these raw materials and intermediate pro- 
ducts becomes split up into numberless branches ; social pro- 
duction increases in diversity. The factory system carries the 
social division of labour immeasurably further than does 
manufacture, for it increases the productiveness of the in- 
dustries it seizes upon, in a far higher degree. 

The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus- 
value and the mass of products in which surplus- value is 
embodied. And, as the substances consumed by the capitalists 
and their dependants become more plentiful, so too do these 
orders of society. Their growing wealth, and the relatively 
diminished number of workmen required to produce the neces- 
saries of life beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and 
luxurious wants, the means of satisfying those wants. A 
larger portion of the produce of society is changed into surplus 
produce, and a larger part of the surplus produce is supplied 
for consumption in a multiplicity of retined shapes. In other 
v/ords, the production of luxuries increases. The refined and 
varied forms of the products are also due to new relations with 
the markets of the world, relations that are created by Modern 

1 " A family of four grown up persons, with two children as winders, earned at the 
feftrl of the last, and the beginning of the present century, by ten hours' daily labour, 
£4 a week. If the work was very pressing, they could earn more .... Before 
thav. they had always suffered from a deficient supply of yarn." (Gaskell, 1. c, pp. 
25-27'.) 

- V. Engels in " Lage, &c," points out the miserable condition of a large number of 
thosi who work on these very articles of luxury. See also numerous instances in the 
'* lie porta of the Children^' Employment Commission." 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 447 

Industry. Not only are greater quantities of foreign articles 
of luxury exchanged for home products, but a greater mass of 
foreign raw materials, ingredients, and intermediate products, 
are used as means of production in the home industries. 
Owing to these relations with the markets of the world, the 
demand for labour increases in the carrying trades, which 
split up into numerous varieties. 1 

The increase of the means of production and subsistence, 
accompanied by a relative diminution in the number of 
labourers, causes an increased demand for labour in making 
canals, docks, tunnels, bridges, and so on, works that can only 
bear fruit in the far future. Entirely new branches of pro- 
duction, creating new fields of labour, are also formed, as the 
direct result either of machinery or of the general industrial 
changes brought about by it. But the place occupied by these 
branches in the general production is, even in the most de- 
veloped countries, far from important. The number of 
labourers that find employment in them is directly propor- 
tional to the demand, created by those industries, for the 
crudest form of manual labour. The chief industries of this 
kind are, at present, gas works, telegraphs, photography, 
steam navigation, and railways. According to the census of 
18G1 for England and Wales, we find in the gas industry 
(gasworks, production of mechanical apparatus, servants of 
the gas companies, &c.), 15,211 persons; in telegraphy, 2399 ; 
in photography, 2366; steam navigation, 3570; and in rail- 
ways, 70,590, of whom the unskilled "navvies," more or less 
permanently employed, and the whole administrative and 
commercial staff, make up about 28,000. The total number of 
persons, therefore, employed in these five new industries 
amounts to f)4«,145. 

Lastly, the extraordinary productiveness of modern in- 
dustry, accompanied as it is hy both a more extensive and a 
more intense exploitation of labour-power in all othor sphi 
of production, allows of the unproductive employment of a 
larger and larger part of the working class, and the consequent 

1 In 1 KG ] , in England and Wale.s, there were 04,066 Bailors ii. tin- i. 
•ervice. 



448 Capitalist Production. 

reproduction, on a constantly extending scale, of the ancient 
domestic slaves under the name of a servant class, including 
men-servants, women-servants, lackeys, &c. According to the 
census of 18G1, the population of England and Wales was 
20,066,244 ; of these, 9,770,2.31) males, and 10,289,965 female. 
If we deduct from this population all who are too old or too 
young for work, all unproductive women, young persons and 
children, the "ideological" classes, such as government officials, 
priests, lawyers, soldiers, &:c. ; further, all who have no occu- 
pation but to consume the labour of others in the form of 
rent, interest, &c. ; and, lastly, paupers, vagabonds, and cri- 
minals, there remain in round numbers eight millions of the 
two sexes of every age, including in that number every capi- 
talist who is in any way engaged in industry, commerce, or 
finance. Among these, 8 millions are : 

Agricultural labourers (including shep- PERSONS, 
herds, farm servants, and maidservants 
living in the houses of farmers), . . 1,098,261 

All who are employed in cotton, woollen, 
worsted, flax, hemp, silk, and jute fac- 
tories, in stocking making and lace 
making by machinery, . . . 642,607 1 

All who are employed in coal mines and 

metal mines, . 565,835 

All who are employed in metal works 
(blast-furnaces, rolling mills, &c), and 
metal manufactures of every kind, . 396, 998 2 

The servant class, .... 1,208,648 

All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, 
taken together, number 1,208,442 ; those employed in tex- 
tile factories and metal industries, taken together, number 

1 Of these only 177,590 are males above 13 years of age. 

2 Of these, 30,501 are females. 

3 Of these, 137,447 males. None are included in the 1,208,648 who do not serve 
in private houses. Between 1801 and 1870 the number of male servants nearly 
doubled itself. It increased to 207,671. In the year 1847 there were 2094 game- 
keepers (for the landlords' preserves), in 1809 there were 4921. The young servant 
girls in the houses of the London lower middle class are in common parlance called 
•'slaveys." 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 449 

1,039,005 ; in both cases less than the number of modern 
domestic slaves. What a splendid result of the capitalist 
exploitation of machinery ! 



SECTION 7. — REPULSION AND ATTRACTION OP WORKPEOPLE BY THE FAC- 
TORY SYSTEM. CRISES IN THE COTTON TRADE. 

All political economists of any standing admit that the 
introduction of new machinery has a baneful effect on the 
workmen in the old handicrafts and manufactures with which 
this machinery at first competes. Almost all of them bemoan 
the slavery of the factory operative. And what is the great 
trump-card that they play ? That machinery, after the 
horrors of the period of introduction and development have 
subsided, instead of diminishing, in the long run increases 
the number of the slaves of labour ! Yes, political economy 
revels in the hideous theory, hideous to every " philanthro- 
pist " who believes in the eternal nature-ordained necessity for 
capitalist production, that after a period of growth and transi- 
tion, even its crowning success, the factory system based on 
machinery, grinds down more workpeople than on its first 
introduction it throws on the streets. 1 

It is true that in some cases, as we saw from instances of 
English worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension 

1 Ganilh, on the contrary, considers the final result of the factory system to be an 
absolutely less number of operatives, at whose expense an increased number of " gens 
honnetes " live and develop their well-known "perfectibilite perfectible." Little a* 
he understands the movement of production, at least he feels, that machinery must 
needs be a very fatal institution, if its introduction converts busy workmen intc 
paupers, and its development calls more slaves of labour into existence tban it ha.* 
suppressed. It is nut possible to bring out the cretinism of his standpoint, except by 
bis own words : " Les classes condamndes a produire et a consommer diminmnt, it 
les classes cpui dirigent le travail, qui soulagcnt, consolent, et eclairtnt toutc la 

population, se multiplient et s'approprient tous les bienfaits qui rcsultciit 

do la diminution des frais du travail, de L'eboudftAOt d< s productions, et du bon 
marche de? consummations. Dans cette direction, l'c8pece humaine s'eleve au\ 
plus bautes conceptions du genif, penctre dans les profondeurs inysteri<"uses de la 
religion, etablit les principes salutaii's d. la morale (which consists in Vapproprier 
touB hs bienfaits,' &c), les lois tutelain s delft liberte (liberty of ' les classes OOO 

demneei & produire? 1 ) et du pouvoir, de t'obeieienoe el de la juitioe, du dovoii ,; 
de 1 humenite." Pot this twaddle iet " Des Bjetetnei d*Boonomic Politique! 

Tar M. Oh. CJanilh." 'Jcmc cd., I'aris, 1821, t. II., p. 224, and let p. U 

a p 



450 Capitalist Production. 

of the factory system may, at a certain stage of its develop- 
ment, be accompanied not only by a relative, but by an 
absolute decrease in the number of operatives employed. In 
the year 18(10, when a special census of all the factories in the 
United Kingdom was taken by order of Parliament, thu 
factories in those parts of Lancashire, Cheshire, and York- 
shire, included in the district of Mr. Baker, the factory in- 
spector, numbered 652 ; 570 of these contained 85,622 power- 
looms, G,8 19,146 spindles (exclusive of doubling spindles), 
employed 27,439 horse-power (steam), and 1390 (water), and 
94,119 persons. In the year 1865, the same factories con- 
tained, looms 95,163, spindles 7,025,031, had a steam-power of 
28,925 horses, and a water-power of 1445 horses, and em- 
ployed 88,913 persons. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the 
increase in looms was 11%, in spindles 3%, and in engine- 
power 3%, while the number of persons employed decreased 
5\%} Between 1852 and 1862, considerable extension of the 
English woollen manufacture took place, while the number of 
hands employed in it remained almost stationary, showing how 
greatly the introduction of new machines had superseded the 
labour of preceding periods. 2 In certain cases, the increase in 
the number of hands employed is only apparent ; that is, it is 
not due to the extension of the factories already established, 
but to the gradual annexation of connected trades ; for in- 
stance, the increase in power-looms, and in the hands em- 
ployed by them between 1838 and 1856, was, in the cotton 
trade, simply owing to the extension of this branch of in- 
dustry ; but in the other trades to the application of steam- 

1 "Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1SG5," p. 58, sq. At the same time, how- 
ever, means of employment for an increased number of hands was ready in 110 new- 
mills with 11,025 looms, 028,756 spindles and 2G95 total horse-power of steam and 
water (1. c.) 

2 " Reports, &c, for 31 Oct., 1862," p. 79. At the end of 1871, Mr. A. Redgrave, the 
factory i spector, in a lecture given at Bradford, in the New Mechanics' Institution, 
said: "What has struck me for some time past is the altered appearance of the 
woollen factories. Formerly they were filled with women and children, now 
machinery seems to do all the work. At my asking for an explanation of this from 
a manufacturer, he gave me the following: ' Under the old system I employed 6S 
persons ; after the introduction of improved machineiy I reduced my hands to 33, 
and lately, in consequence of new and extensive alterations, I have been in a position 
to reduce those 33 to 13." " 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 451 

power to the carpet-loom, to the ribbon-loom, and to the linen- 
loom, which previously had been worked by the power of 
men. 1 Hence the increase of the hands in these latter trades 
was merely a symptom of a diminution in the total number 
employed. Finally, we have considered this question entirely 
apart from the fact, that everywhere, except in the metal 
industries, young persons (under 18), and women and children 
form the preponderating element in the class of factory 
hands. 

Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of hands actually dis- 
placed and virtually replaced by machinery, we can under- 
stand how the factory operatives, through the building of 
more mills and the extension of old ones in a given industry, 
may become more numerous than the manufacturing work- 
men and handicraftsmen that have been displaced. Suppose, 
for example, that in the old mode of production, a capital of 
£500 is employed weekly, two-fifths being constant and three- 
fifths variable capital, i.e., £200 being laid out in means of 
production, and £.'300, say £1 per man, in labour-power. On 
the introduction of machinery the composition of this capital 
becomes altered. We will suppose it to consist of four-fifths 
constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only £100 is 
now laid out in labour-power. Consequently, two-tlrirds of 
the workmen are discharged If now the business extends, 
and the total capital employed grows to £1. 300 under un- 
changed conditions, the number of operatives employed will 
increase to 300, just as many as before the introduction of the 
machinery. If the capita] further grows to £2000, 400 men 
will be employed, or one-third more than under the old Bystetn. 
Their numbers have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but 
relatively, Le., in proportion to the total capital ad van 
they have diminished by 800, for the £2000 capital would, m I 
old state of things, have employed 1200 instead oi 400 men. 
fcience, a relative decrease in the number of hands is con- 
at with an actual increfl We assumed above that 

while the total capital increases, its composition remains the 
same, because the conditions of production remain 1 

1 & arte, &c, ::i Oct., 1- •'.," p. Lft 



45 2 Capitalist Production. 

But wc have already seen that, with every advance in the use 
of machinery, the constant component of capital, that part 
which consists of machinery, raw material, &c, increases, 
while the variable component, the part laid out in labour- 
power, decreases. We also know that in no other system of pro- 
duction is improvement so continuous, and the composition of 
the capital employed so constantly changing as in the factory 
system. These changes are, however, continually interrupted 
by periods of rest, during which there is a mere quantitative 
extension of the factories on the existing technical basis. 
During such periods the operatives increase in number. Thus, 
in 1835, the total number of operatives in the cotton, woollen, 
worsted, flax, and silk factories of the United Kingdom was 
only 354,684 ; while in 1861 the number of the power-loom 
weavers alone (of both sexes and of all ages, from eight years 
upwards), amounted to 230,654. Certainly, this growth 
appears less important when we consider that in 1838 the 
hand-loom weavers with their families still numbered 800,000/ 
not to mention those thrown out of work in Asia, and on the 
Continent of Europe. 

In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I 
shall refer to some actually existing relations, the existence of 
which our theoretical investigation has not yet disclosed. 

So long as, in a given branch of industry, the factory system 
extends itself at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manu- 
facture, the result is as sure as is the result of an encounter 
between an army furnished with breach-loaders, and one 
armed with bows and arrows. This first period, during 
which machinery conquers its field of action, is of decisive 
importance owing to the extraordinary profits that it helps to 
produce. These profits not only form a source of accelerated 
accumulation, but also attract into the favoured sphere of pro- 
duction a large part of the additional social capital that is 

1 "The sufferings of the hand-loom weavers were the subject of an inquiry by a 
Koyal Commission, but although their distress was acknowledged and lamented, the 
amelioration of their condition was left, and probably necessarily so, to the chances 
and changes of time, which it may now be hoped " [20 years later !] " have nearly 
obliterated those miseries, and not improbably by the present great extension of the 
power-loom.' ("Kep. lnsp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1850/ p. 15.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 453 

being constantly created, and is ever on the look-out for new 
investments. The special advantages of this first period of fast 
and furious activity are felt in every branch of production 
that machinery invades. So soon, however, as the factory 
system has gained a certain breadth of footing and a definite 
degree of maturity, and, especially, so soon as its technical 
basis, machinery, is itself produced by machinery ; so soon as 
coal mining and iron mining, the metal industries, and the 
means of transport have been revolutionised ; so soon, in short, 
as the general conditions requisite for production by the 
modern industrial system have been established, this mode 
of production acquires an elasticity, a capacity for sudden 
extension by leaps and bounds that finds no hindrance except 
in the supply of raw material and in the disposal of the pro- 
duce. On the one hand, the immediate effect of machinery is 
to increase the supply of raw material in the same way, for 
example, as the cotton gin augmented the production of 
cotton. 1 On the other hand, the cheapness of the articles pro- 
duced by machinery, and the improved means of transport 
and communication furnish the weapons for conquering foreign 
markets. By ruining handicraft production in other countries, 
machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of 
its raw material. In this way East India was compelled t<> 
produce cotton, wool, hemp, jute, and indigo for Great 
Britain. 1 By constantly making a part of the hands " super- 
numerary," modern industry, in all countries where it baa 
taken root, gives a spur to emigration and to the colonization 
of foreign lands, which are thereby converted into settlements 
for growing the raw material of the mother country ; just as 
Australia, for example, was converted into a colony for growing 
wool. 3 A new and international division of labour, a division 

1 Other ways in which machinery affects the production of raw inaUrial trill l>c 
mentioned in the third hook. 

- KXI'OKT OK COTTON FROM IN'OIA TO CHKAT IIIUT.MN. 

184&— 34,540,143 lbs. 1080.-204,141,168 lbs. 18G5.— 44r>,047,<X)O lbs. 

; I KFOBT OK WOOL FKOM JNKIA TO QBSAT IUUTAIN. 

1846.— 4,070,581 ttw. I860.— 20,214,1781b* WW- 20,679^11111* 

lAloUT Of WOOL riU.M TIIK CAI'K TO CKKAT BBTTA1X. 

1846b 2,968,467 Ibe. I860 16,674,846 lb* I 1,920,6231b* 

lAIMItT OK WOOL nOM At'STHAM \ I « » QBBAT I KIIMN. 

1846. 21,789,846 Iba 1860 50.166,616 lb* 1866. 100,734,261 lbt. 



454 



Capitalist Pi'oduction. 



suited to tlie requirements of the chief centres of modern 
industry springs up, and converts one part of the globe into a 
chiefly agricultural field of production, for supplying the other 
part which remains a chiefly industrial field. This revolution 
hanjjs together with radical changes in agriculture which we 
need not here further inquire into. 1 

On the motion of Mr. Gladstone, the House of Commons 
ordered, on the 17th February, 18G7, a return of the total 
quantities of grain, corn, and flour, of all sorts, imported into, 
and exported from, the United Kingdom, between the years 
1831 and 1866. I give below a summary of the result. The 
flour is given in quarters of corn. 

QUINQUENNIAL PERIODS AND THE YEAR 186G. 



Annual Average. 


1831-1835. 


1836-1840. 


1841-1845. 


1846-1850. 


Import (Qrs.) - 


1,096,373 


2,380,729 


2,843,865 


8,776,552 


Export ,, ... 


225,363 


251,770 


139,056 


155,461 


Excess of Import over ex- 
port. .... 


871..110 


2,137,959 


2,704,809 


8,621,091 


Population. 










Yearly average in each 
period, .... 


24,621,107 


25,929,507 


27,262,569 


27,797,508 


Average quantity of corn, 










&c, in qrs., consumed an- 
nually per head over and 
above the home produce 
consumed, 


036 


0-082 


0-099 


0310 



1 The economical development of the United States is itself a product of European, 
more especially of English modern industry. In their present form (1866) the States 
must still be considered a European colony. 

EXPORT OF COTTON FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT BRITAIN. 

1846.-401,949,393 lbs. 1852.-765,630,543 lbs. 1859.-961,707,264 lbs. I860.— 
1,115,890,608 lbs. 

EXPORT OF CORN, &C, FROM THE UNITED STATES TO GREAT BRITAIN. 

1850. 1862. 

Wheat, cwts 16,202,312 41,033,503 

Barley, „ 3,669,653 6,624,800 

Oats, „ 3,174,801 4,426,904 

Rye, „ 388,740 7,108 

Flour, ,, 3,810,440 7,207,113 

Buckwheat, cwts 1054 10,571 



Machifiery and Modern Industry. 

QUINQUENNIAL PERIODS, &c— (Continued.) 



455 



Annual Average. 


1851-1855. 


1856-1860. 


1861-1865. 


1866. 


Import (Qrs.) - 


8,345,237 


10,912,612 


15,009,871 


16,457,340 


Export ,,---- 


307,491 


341,150 


302,754 


216,218 


Excess of Import over Ex- 


8,037,746 


10,572,462 


14,707,117 


16,241,122 


POPULATION. 










Yearly average in each 
period, - 


27,572,923 


28,391,544 


29,381,460 


29,935,404 


Average quantity of corn, 
&c, in Qrs., consumed an- 










nually per head over and 
above the home produce 
consumed, - 


0-291 


0-372 


0*543 


0*543 



The enormous power, inherent in the factory system, of ex- 
panding by jumps, and the dependence of that system on the 
markets of the world, necessarily beget feverish production, 
followed by over-filling of the markets, whereupon contraction 
of the markets brings on crippling of production. The life of 
modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate 
activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation. 
The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects 
the employment, and consequently the conditions of existence, 
of the operatives become normal, owing to these periodic 
changes of the industrial cycle. Except in the periods of pros- 
perity, there rages between the capitalists the most furious 
combat for the share of each in the markets. This share is 
directly proportional to the cheapness of the product. Besides 
the rivalry that this struggle begets in the application 
of Improved machinery for replacing labour-power, and of new 
methods of production, there also comes a time in every indus- 





1850. 


i86a 


Maize, cwts. 


5,473,161 


ll,»i'.U,MS 


Bero or Bigg (a sort of ) 
Hurl.-y), cwU. ... / 


2039 


7675 


Pcan, cwts. 


811,620 


1,094,721 


Beans, ,, 


1,822,97! 


•7,187 


Total export*, 


84,86mm 


1 



45^ Capitalist Production. 

trial cycle, when a forcible reduction of wages beneath tin- 
value of labour-power, is attempted for the purpose of 
cheapening commodities. 1 

A necessar} 7 condition, therefore, to the growth of the number 
of factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of 
the amount of capital invested in mills. This growth, however, 
is conditioned by the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle. It 
is, besides, constantly interrupted by the technical progress 
that at one time virtually supplies the place of new workmen, 
at another, actually displaces old ones. This qualitative change 
in mechanical industry continually discharges hands from 
the factory, or shuts its doors against the fresh stream of recruits, 
while the purely quantitative extension of the factories absorbs 
not only the men thrown out of work, but also fresh contin- 
gents. The workpeople are thus continually both repelled and 
attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time, 
constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill of the levies. 

The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by tak- 
ing a rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry. 

1 In an appeal made in July, 1866, to the Trade Societies of England, by the shoe- 
makers of Leicester, who had been thrown on the streets by a lock-out, it is stated : 
"Twenty years ago the Leicester shoe trade was revolutionised by the introduction 
of riveting in the place of stitching. At that time good wages could be earned. 
Great competition was shown between the different firms as to which could turn out 
the neatest article. Shortly afterwards, however, a worse kind of competition sprang 
up, namely, that of underselling one another in the market. The injurious con- 
sequences soon manifested themselves in reductions of wages, and so sweepingly 
quick was the fall in the price of labour, that many firms now pay only one half of 
the original wages. And yet, though wages sink lower and lower, profits appear, 
with each alteration in the scale of wages, to increase." Even bad times are utilized 
by the manufacturers, for making exceptional profits by excessive lowering of wages, 
i.e., by a direct robbery of the labourer's means of subsistence. One example (it has 
reference to the crisis in the Coventry silk weaving) : "From information I have received 
from manufacturers as well as workmen, there seems to be no doubt that wages have 
been reduced to a greater extent than either the competition of the foreign producers, or 
other circumstances have rendered necessary .... the majority of weavers are 
working at a reduction of 30 to 40 per cent, in their wages. A piece of ribbon for 
making which the weaver got 6s. or 7s. five years back, now only brings them 3s. 3d. 
or 3s. 6d. ; other work is now priced at 2s. and 2s. 3d. which was formerly priced at 
4s. and 4s 3d. The reduction in wage seems to have been carried to a greater extent 
than is necessary for increasing demand. Indeed, the reduction in the cost of weav- 
ing, in the case of many descriptions of ribbons, has not been accompanied by any 
corresponding reduction in the selling price of the manufactured article. " (Mr. F. 
D. Longe's Report. "Ch. Emp. Com., V. Rep., 1866," p. 114, 1.) 



Machinery and Modei'n Industry. 457 

From 1770 to 1815 tLis trade was depressed or stagnant for 
5 years only. During this period of 45 years the English 
manufacturers had a monopoly of machinery and of the markets 
of the world. From 1815 to 1821 depression ; 1822 and 1823 
prosperity ; 1824 abolition of the laws against Trades' Unions, 
great extension of factories everywhere; 1825 crisis; 1826* 
great misery and riots among the factory operatives ; 1827 
slight improvement; 1828 great increase in power-looms, and 
in exports ; 1829 exports, especially to India, surpass all 
former years ; 1830 glutted markets, great distress ; 1831 to 

1833 continued depression, the monopoly of the trade with 
India and China withdrawn from the East India Company ; 

1834 great increase of factories and machinery, shortness of 
hands. The new poor law furthers the migration of agricultural 
labourers into the factory districts. The country districts 
swept of children. White slave trade ; 1835 great prosperity, 
contemporaneous starvation of the handloom weavers ; 1836 
great prosperity; 1837 and 1838 depression and crisis; 1839 
revival ; 1840 great depression, riots, calling out of the 
military; 1841 and 1842 frightful suffering among the factory 
operatives ; 1842 the manufacturers lock the hands oat of 
the factories in order to enforce the repeal of the Corn Laws. 
The operatives stream in thousands into the towns of Lanca- 
shire and Yorkshire, are driven back by the military, and 
their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 1843 great misery ; 
1844 revival; 1845 great prosperity ; 184G continued improve 
ment at first, then reaction. Repeal of the Corn Laws ; 1847 
crisis, general reduction of wages by 10 and more per cent. 
in honour of the " big loaf;" 1848 continued depression; 
Manchester under military protection; 1849 revival; 1850 
prosperity ; 1851 falling prices, low wages, frequent strikes ; 
1852 improvement begins, strikes continue, the manu- 
facturers threaten to import foreign hands; 1853 increasing 
exports. Strike for 8 months, and great misery at Preston ; 
1S54 prosperity, glutted markets; 1855 news of failures 
stream in from the United States, Canada, and the Eastern 
markets; 1 S 5G great prosperity; 1857 crisis; L858 improve- 
ment j 1859 great prosperity, increase in factories; I860 



45^ Capitalist Production. 

Zenith of the English cotton trade, the Indian, Australian, and 
other markets so glutted with goods that even in 18G3 they 
had not absorbed the whole lot ; the French Treaty of Commerce, 
enormous growth of factories and machinery ; 1861 prosperity 
continues for a time, reaction, the American civil war, cotton 
famine ; 18C2 to 1863 complete collapse. 

The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dis- 
pense with dwelling upon it for a moment. From the indi- 
cations as to the condition of the markets of the world in 1860 
and 1861, we see that the cotton famine came in the nick of 
time for the manufacturers, and was to some extent advan- 
tageous to them, a fact that was acknowledged in the reports 
of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Par- 
liament by Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events. 1 
No doubt, among the 2887 cotton mills in the United Kingdom 
in 1861, there were many of small size. According to the 
report of Mr. A. Redgrave, out of the 2109 mills included in 
his district, 392 or 19% employed less than ten horse-power 
each ; 345, or 16% employed 10 H. P., and less than 20 H. P. ; 
while 1372 employed upwards of 20 H. P. 2 The majority of 
the small mills were weaving sheds, built during the period of 
prosperity after 1S58, for the most part by speculators, of 
whom one supplied the yarn, another the machinery, a third 
the buildings, and were worked by men who bad been over- 
lookers, or by other persons of small means. These small 
manufacturers mostly went to the wall. The same fate would 
have overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved 
off only by the cotton famine. Although they formed one- 
third of the total number of manufacturers, yet their mills 
absorbed a much smaller part of the capital invested in the 
cotton trade. As to the extent of the stoppage, it appeal's 
from authentic estimates, that in October 1862, 60*3% of the 
spindles, and 58% of the looms were standing. This refers to 
the cotton trade as a whole, and, of course, requires consider- 
able modification for individual districts. Only very few mills 
worked full time (60 hours a week), the remainder worked at 
intervals. Even in those few cases where full time was 

i Conf. Reports of Insp. of Fact. 31st October, 1862, p. 30. " 1. c, p. 19. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 459 

worked, and at the customary rate of piece-wage, the weekly 
wages of the operatives necessarily shrank, owing to good 
cotton being replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in fine 
spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat, and pure 
cotton by mixings of waste and Surat. The shorter fibre of 
the Surat cotton and its dirty condition, the greater fragility 
of the thread, the substitution of all sorts of heavy ingredients 
for flour in sizing the warps, all these lessened the speed of the 
machinery, or the number of the looms that could be superin- 
tended by one weaver, increased the labour caused by defects 
in the machinery, and reduced the piece-wage by reducing the 
mass of the product turned off. Where Surat cotton was used, 
the loss to the operatives when on full time, amounted to 20, 
30, and more per cent. But besides this, the majority of the 
manufacturers reduced the rate of piece-wage by 5, 7J, and 10 
per cent. We can therefore conceive the situation of those 
hands who were employed for only 3, 3J or 4 days a week, or 
for only G hours a day. Even in 1863, after a comparative 
improvement had set in, the weekly wages of spinners and of 
weavers were 3s. 4d., 3s. 10d., 4s. Gd. and 5s. Id. 1 Even in 
this miserable state of things, however, the inventive spirit of 
the master never stood still, but was exercised in making 
deductions from waives. These were to some extent inflicted 
as a penalty for defects in the finished article that were really 
due to his bad cotton and to his unsuitable machinery. More- 
over, where the manufacturer owned the cottages of the work- 
people, he paid himself his rents by deducting the amount 
from these miserable wajxes. Mr. Redgrave tells us of self- 
acting minders (operatives who manage a pair of self-acting 
mules) "earning at the end of a fortnight's full work 8s. 1 Id., 
and that from this sum was deducted the rent of the house, 
the manufacturer, however, returning half the rent as a gift. 
The minders took away the sum of 6& lid. In many places 
the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. to 9s. per week, and 
the weavers from 2s. to 6a per week, during the latter put of 
1862. M ■ Even when working short time the rent was fre- 
quently deducted from the wages of th- v operative*. 1 N 

1 "Rep. [asp. of fcoft., Utl October, 188B," pp, 11 1 • 

1 "Rep, Intp. of Pact., SletOotober, LS68." « I. 1 . p -i 



460 Capitalist Production. 






wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a kind of famine 
fever broke out. But more characteristic than all this, was 
the revolution that took place in the process of production at 
the expense of the workpeople. Experimenta in corpore vili, 
like those of anatomists on frogs, were formally made. " Al- 
though," says Mr. Redgrave, " I have given the actual earnings 
of the operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that 
they earn the same amount week by week. The operatives 
are subject to great fluctuation from the constant experi- 
mentalizing of the manufacturers .... the earnings of the 
operatives rise and fall with the quality of the cotton mixings; 
sometimes they have been within 15 per cent, of former 
earnings, and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from 
50 to 60 per cent." 1 These experiments were not made solely 
at the expense of the workman's means of subsistence. His 
five senses also had to pay the penalty. " The people who are 
employed in making up Surat cotton complain very much. 
They inform me, on opening the bales of cotton there is an 
intolerable smell, which causes sickness .... In the mixing, 
scribbling and carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are 
disengaged, irritate the air passages, and give rise to cough 
and difficulty of breathing. A disease of the skin, no doubt 
from the irritation of the dirt contained in the Surat cotton, 
also prevails . . . The fibre being so short, a great amount of 
size, both animal and vegetable, is used .... Bronchitis is 
more prevalent owing to the dust. Inflammatory sore throat 
is common, from the same cause. Sickness and dyspepsia are 
produced by the frequent breaking of the weft, when the 
weaver sucks the weft through the eye of the shuttle." On 
the other hand, the substitutes for flour were a Fortunatus' 
purse to the manufacturers, by increasing the w T eight of the 
yarn. They caused u 15 lbs. of raw material to weigh 26' lbs. 
after it was woven." 2 In the Report of Inspectors of Factories 
for 30th April, 1864, we read as follows : " The trade is avail- 
ing itself of this resource at present to an extent which is 
even discreditable. I have heard on good authority of a cloth 
weighing 8 lbs. which was made of o\ lbs. cotton and 2f lbs. 

1 1. c, pp. 50-51. » 1. c, pp., 62-63. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 461 

size ; and of another cloth weighing 5 \ lbs., of which 2 lbs. 
was size. These were ordinary export shirtings. In cloths of 
other descriptions, as much as 50 per cent, size is sometimes 
added ; so that a manufacturer may, and does truly boast, that 
he is getting rich by selling cloth for less money per pound 
than he paid for the mere yarn of which they are composed." l 
But the workpeople had to suffer, not only from the experi- 
ments of the manufacturers inside the mills, and of the muni- 
cipalities outside, not only from reduced wages and absence of 
work, from want and from charity, and from the eulogistic 
speeches of lords and commons. " Unfortunate females who, 
in consequence of the cotton famine, were at its commence- 
ment thrown out of employment, and have thereby become 
outcasts of society ; and now, though trade has revived, an< I 
work is plentiful, continue members of that unfortunate class, 
and are likely to continue so. There are also in the borough 
more youthful prostitutes than I have known for the last 25 
years." 2 

We find then, in the first 45 years of the English cotton 
trade, from 1770 to 1815, only 5 years of crisis and stagnation; 
but this was the period of monopoly. The second period from 
1815 to 18G3 counts, during its 48 years, only 20 years of 
revival and prosperity against 28 of depression and stagnation. 
Between 1815 and 1830 the competition with the continent of 
Europe and with the United States sets in. After 1833, the 
extension of the Asiatic markets is enforced by "destruction of 
the human race" (the wholesale extinction of Indian handloom 
weavers). After the repeal of the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, 
there are 8 years of moderate activity and prosperity against ( .) 
years of depression and stagnation. The condition of the adult 
male operatives, even during the years of prosperity, may be 
judged from the note subjoined. 3 

1 Rep. kc. 30th April, 1861, p. 27. 

3 From a letter of Mr. Harris, Chief Constable of Iiolton, in Hop. of [nip. "t ft '. 

.'{1st October, L866, pp. 81-68. 

In an appeal, dated 1868, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, fee., for the 

purpose of forming a society foi organised emigration, we Bad the following: " that 

a large emigration of factory ITOrkeri is now absolutely essential to raise them fiom 
their present prostrate condition, few will ileny J hut to show tli.it n OOntinUOUl 

stream of emigration ia at all times demanded, ami, without which it i- Impossible 



462 Capitalist Production. 

SECTION 8.— REVOLUTION EFFECTED IN MANUFACTURE, HANDICRAFTS, *NI> 
DOMESTIC INDUSTRY BY MODERN INDUSTRY. 

a. Overthrow of Co-operation based on Handicraft and on the 

Division of Labour. 

We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation 
based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the divi- 
sion of handicraft labour. An example of the first sort is the 
mowing-machine ; it replaces co-operation between mowers. 
A striking example of the second kind, is the needle-making 
machine. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day, made 
in co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day. On the other hand, 
a single needle-machine makes 145,000 in a working day of 11 
hours. One woman or one girl superintends four such machines^ 
and so produces near upon 000,000 needles in a day, and up- 
wards of 3,000,000 in a week. 1 A single machine, when it 
takes the place of co-operation or of manufacture, may itself 
serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character. 
Still, such a return to handicrafts is but a transition to the 

for them to maintain their position in ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the 
subjoined facts : — In 1814 the official value of cotton goods exported was £17,605,378, 
whilst the real marketable value was £20,070,824. Inl85S the official value of cotton 
goods exported, was £182,221,081 ; but the real or marketable value was only 
£43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the former 
price. To produce results so disadvantageous to the country generally, and to the 
factory workers in particular, several causes have co-operated, which, had circum- 
stances permitted, we should have brought more prominently under your notice ; 
suffice it for the present to say that the most obvious one is the constant redundancy 
of labour, without which a trade so ruinous in its effects never could have been carried 
on, and which requires a constantly extending market to save it from annihilation. 
Our cotton mills may be brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, 
which, under present arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself ; but the human 
mind is constantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in stating 
that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, yet, from 
the natural increase of population, and the displacement of labour to cheapen pro- 
duction, a large percentage of the male adults in the most prosperous times find it 
impossible to obtain work in factories on any conditions whatever." ( ''Reports of Insp. 
of Fact., 30th April, 1803," pp. 51-52.) We shall, in a later chapter, see how our 
friends, the manufacturers, endeavoured, during the catastrophe in the cotton trade, 
to prevent by every means, including State interference, the emigration of the 
operatives. 

i "Ch. Empl. Comm. IV Report, 1864," p. 108, n. 447. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 463 

factory sj^stem, which, as a rule, makes its appearance so soon 
as the human muscles are replaced, for the purpose of driving 
the machines, by a mechanical motive power, such as steam or 
water. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an 
industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of 
mechanical power. This is effected by hiring steam power, as 
is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of 
small caloric-engines, as in some branches of weaving. 1 In the 
Coventry silk weaving industry the experiment of " cottage 
factories " was tried. In the centre of a square surrounded by 
rows of cottages, an engine-house was built and the engine 
connected by shafts with the looms in the cottages. In all 
cases the power was hired at so much per loom. The rent 
was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not. Each 
cottage held from 2 to 6 looms ; some belonged to the weaver, 
some were bought on credit, some were hired. The struggle 
between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted 
over 12 years. It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 
cottage-factories. 2 Wherever the nature of the process did not 
involve production on a large scale, the new industries that 
bave sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope mak- 
ing, steel-pen making, &c., have, as a general rule, first passed 
through the handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing 
stage, as short phases of transition to the factory stage. The 
transition is very difficult in those cases where the production 
of the article by manufacture consists, not of a series 
graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected onea 
This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment 
of steel-pen factories. Nevertheless, about 15 years ago, a 
machine was invented that automatically performed 6 sepai 
operations at once. The first steel-pens were supplied by the 
handicraft system, in the year L820, at £7 4& the gross; in 1 
they were supplied by manufacture at 8a, and to-day the factor} 

1 In the Uni' restoration in thin way, of handicrafts bated on n acbiw i\ 

■ frequent; and tbi refore, irheo the Ini titable transition to the factor] 

place, tir- on uing concentration will, compared with Europe and even wuii 
1 nd, stride on In seven I ague boota. 
'See "Hep. of Imp, of !•'., H t., 1 65," p. ''•'• 



464 Capitalist Production. 

system supplies them to the trade at from 2s. to 6d. the 
gross. 1 

b. Re-actiou of the Factory System on Manufacture and 
Domestic Industries. 

Along with the development of the factory system and of 
the revolution in agriculture that accompanies it, production 
in all the other branches of industry not only extends, but 
alters its character. The principle, carried out in the factory 
system, of analysing the process of production into its con- 
stituent phases, and of solving the problems thus proposed by 
the application of mechanics, of chemistry, and of the whole 
range of the natural sciences, becomes the determining prin- 
ciple everywhere. Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the 
manufacturing industries first for one detail process, then for 
another. Thus the solid crystal of their organisation, based on 
the old division of labour, becomes dissolved, and makes way 
for constant changes. Independently of this, a radical change 
takes place in the composition of the collective labourer, a 
change of the persons working in combination. In contrast 
with the manufacturing period, the division of labour is thence- 
forth based, wherever possible, on the employment of women, 
of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one word, 
on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in England. 
This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, 
whether employing machinery or not, but also witli the so- 
called domestic industry, whether carried on in the houses of 
the workpeople or in small workshops. This modern so-called 
domestic industry has nothing, except the name, in common 
with the old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of 
which presupposes independent urban handicrafts, independent 
peasant farming, and above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer 

1 Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large scale. It 
produced, so early as 1851, over 180,000,000 of pens yearly, and consumed 120 tons of 
steel. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in the United Kingdom, and 
at present produces thousands of millions of steel pens. According to the Census of 
1801, the number of persons employed was 1428, of whom 1*208 females from 5 years 
of age upwards. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 465 

and his family. That old-fashioned industry has now been 
converted into an outside department of the factory, the manu- 
factory, or the warehouse. Besides the factory operatives, the 
manufacturing workmen and the handicraftsmen, whom it 
concentrates in large masses at one spot, and directly com- 
mands, capital also sets in motion, by means of invisible 
threads, another army ; that of the workers in the domestic 
industries, who dwell in the large towns and are also scattered 
over the face of the country. An example : The shirt factory 
of Messrs. Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1000 opera- 
tives in the factory itself, and 9000 people spread up and down 
the country and working in their own houses. 1 

The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is 
carried out in a more shameless manner in modern Manufacture 
than in the factory proper. This is because the technical 
foundation of the factory system, namely, the substitution of 
machines for muscular power, and the light character of the 
labour, is almost entirely absent in Manufacture, and at the 
same time women and over-young children are subjected, in a 
most unconscionable way, to the influence of poisonous or in- 
jurious substances. This exploitation is more shameless in the 
so-called domestic industry than in manufactures, and that 
because the power of resistance in the labourers decreases with 
their dissemination ; because a whole series of plundering 
parasites insinuate themselves between the employer and tho 
workman; because a domestic industry has always to compete. 
either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the 
same branch of production ; because poverty rubs the workman 
of tho conditions most essential to his labour, of space, light and 
ventilation; because employment becomes more and more irre- 
gular; and, finally, because in these the last resorts of the 
masses made "redundant" by Modern Industry and Agricul- 
ture, competition for work attains its maximum. Economy bo 
the means of production, first systematically carried out in 

the factory system, and there, from tin- very beginning, 1 

incident with the most reckless squandering ^i' labour poi 
and robbery of the condii ions normally requisite for labour — this 

1 Oh, 1:114.1. Comm , 11. 1:. p. 1864, p, i.xvin., n. ir>. 



466 Capitalist P roduction, 

economy now shows its antagonistic and murderous side more 
and more in a given branch of industry, the less the social 
productive power of labour and the technical basis for a com- 
bination of processes are developed in that branch. 



c. Modern Manufacture. 

I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles 
laid down above. As a matter of fact, the reader is already 
familiar with numerous instances given in the chapter on the 
working day. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham 
and the neighbourhood, there are employed, mostly in very 
heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons, besides 10,000 
women. There they are to be seen in the unwholesome brass- 
foundries, button factories, enamelling, galvanizing, and lacker- 
ing works. 1 Owing to the excessive labour of their work- 
people, both adult and non-adult, certain London houses where 
newspapers and books are printed, have got the ill-omened 
name of " slaughter-houses." 2 Similar excesses are practised 
in bookbinding, where the victims are chiefly women, girls, and 
children ; young persons have to do heavy work in rope-walks 
and night-work in salt mines, candle manufactories., and 
chemical works ; young people are worked to death at turning 
the looms in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by 
machinery. 3 One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and 
the worst paid kinds of labour, and one on which women and 
young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. 
It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own im- 
mense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the 
whole world. They flow in from Japan, from the most remote 
States of South America, and from the Canary Islands. But 
the chief sources of their supply are Germany, France, Russia, 
Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Belgium, and Holland. They are used 
for manure, for making bed- flocks, for shoddy, and they 

1 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield. 

2 Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep. 18GG, p. 3, n. 24, p. 6, n. 55, 56, p. 7, n. 59, 60. 

8 L.c. pp. 114, 115, n. 6, 7. The commissioner justly remarks that though as a 
rule machines take the place of men, here literally young persons replace machines. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 467 

serve as the raw material of paper. The rag-sorters are the 
medium for the spread of small-pox and other infectious 
diseases, and they themselves are the first victims. 1 A classical 
example of over-work, of hard and inappropriate labour, and 
of its brutalising effects on the workman from his childhood 
upwards, is afforded not only by coal-mining and miners 
generally, but also by tile and brick making, in which industry 
the recently invented machinery is, in England, used only here 
and there. Between May and September the work lasts from 
5 in the morning till 8 in the evening, and where the drying 
is done in the open air, it often lasts from 4 in the morning till 
9 in the evening. Work from 5 in the morning til 7 in the 
evening is considered " reduced " and " moderate." Both boys 
and girls of G and even of 4 years of age are employed. They 
work for the same number of hours, often longer, than the 
adults. The work is hard and the summer heat increases the 
exhaustion. In a certain tile field at Mosley, e.g., a young 
woman, 24 years of age, was in the habit of making 2000 tiles 
a day, with the assistance of 2 little girls, who carried the clay 
for her, and stacked the tiles. These girls carried daily 10 tons 
Dp the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of '30 feet, 
and then for a distance of 210 feet. " It is impossible for a 
child to pass through the purgatory of a tile-field without great 
moral degradation . . . the low language, which they arc 
accustomed to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy, in- 
decent, and shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and 
half wild, they grow up, make them in after life lawless, 
abandoned, dissolute A frightful source of demora- 
lization is the mode of living. Each moulder, who is alwa\ - a 
skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, supplies his 7 sub- 
ordinates with board and Lodging in his cottage Whether 
members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls all sleep 

in the cottage, which contains generally two, exceptionally \\ 

rooms, all on tin; ground floor, and badly ventilated. Th< 
people are so exhausted after the day's hard work, that Doil I 
the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in (lie 

I Sec the Report OB thl ItJf ti.i<L-. :itrl rnnuit <>un dtttill In Poblfa II'. iN) Vlil, 

Bep. Load. 1866, ai»i». pp. 1%, 90S. 



468 Capitalist Prodtiction. 

least observed. Many of these cottages are models of untidi- 
ness, dirt, and dust. . . . The greatest evil of the system 
that employs young girls on this sort of work, consists in this, 
that, as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole 
of their after-life to the most abandoned rabble. The}* become 
rough, foul-mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that 
they are women. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked 
far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they 
learn to treat all feelings of decency and of shame with con- 
tempt. During meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, 
or watch the boys bathing in a neighbouring canal. Their 
heavy day's work at length completed, they put on better 
clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses." That 
excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among 
the whole of this class, is only natural. " The worst is that the 
brickmakers despair of themselves. You might as well, said 
one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to 
raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir ! " l 

As to the manner in which capital effects an economy in the 
requisites of labour, in modern Manufacture (in which I in- 
clude all workshops of larger size, except factories proper), 
official and most ample material bearing on it is to be found in 
the Public Health Reports IV. (1863) and VI. (1864). The 
description of the workshops, more especially these of the 
London printers and tailors, surpasses the most loathsome 
phantasies of our romance writers. The effect on the health of 
the workpeople is self-evident. Dr. Simon, the chief medical 
officer of the Privy Council and the official editor of the 
" Public Health Reports," says : " In my fourth Report (1863) 
I showed, how it is practically impossible for the workpeople 
to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz., the 
right that, no matter what the work for which their employer 
brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon 
him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. 
I pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically in- 
capable of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are 

i Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep., 18GG, xvi., n. 96, 97, ami p. 130, n. 39, Gl. See also 
III. Rep., 1SG4, p. 48, 56. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 



469 



unable to obtain any effective support from the paid 
administrations of the sanitary police. . . . The life of 
myriads of workmen and workwomen is now uselessly tortured 
and shortened by the never-ending physical suffering that their 
mere occupation begets." * In illustration of the way in which 
the workrooms influence the state of health, Dr. Simon gives 
the following table of mortality. 2 



Number of persons of all 
ages employed in the re- 
spective industries. 


Industries compared 

as regards 

health. 


Death rate per 100,000 men in 
the respective industries be- 
tween the stated ages. 




Agriculture in 


Age 25-35. 


Age 35-45. 


Age io-::;. 


958,265 


England & Wales 


743 


805 


1,145 


22,301 men \ 
12,379 women / 


London tailors 


958 


1,262 


2,093 


13,803 


London printers 


894 


1,747 


2,307 



d. Modern Domestic Industry. 

I now come to the so-called domestic industry. Tn order to 
get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital con- 
ducts its exploitation in the background, of modern mechanical 
industry, one must go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of 
nail-making, s carried on in a few remote villages of England. 
In this place, however, it will be enough to give a few examples 
from those branches of the lace-making and straw -plaiting 

1 Public Health. Sixth Rep. Lond. 1864, p. 31. 

* 1. c, p. 30. Dr. Simou remarks that the mortality among the London tailors and 
printers between the ages of 25 and 3.*i is in fact much greater, beoaUM the employer! 
in London obtain from the country a great number of young people up to 80 yean o( 
i§e, m " apprentice! " and "' Lmprovere, ' who come for the purpose of being pel f- eti d 

in their trade. Tie MM figure in the OeniUI M Londoners, they swell out the nuud>« r 

<»f in-ads on which the London deal h-rate is calculated, without adding proportion 

to the number of deathl In that place. The greater pai t of them 11 in to the 

country, and especially in cases of severe illness. (1. c.) 

* I allude here t<> hammered naile, as dietinguiehed from nails cut out mid mad 

machinery See Child. Ihnpl. Comm., Third Kip. p. *i. 1». xii. n. ISO LSty l 1 - 

11, p. 114, n. 487, p. 137, n. 671 



47° Capitalist Production. 

industries that are not yet carried on by the aid of machinery, 
and that as yet do not compete with branches carried on in 
factories or in manufactories. 

Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the produc- 
tion of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the 
Factory Act, 18G1. Almost the whole of the remaining 
140,000 are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, 
the male sex, however, being weakly represented. The state 
of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen 
from the following table, computed by Dr. Trueman, physician 
to the Nottingham General Dispensary. Out of 686 
female patients who were lace makers, most of them between 
the ages of 17 and 24, the number of consumptive ones were : 

1852.— 1 in 45. 1855—1 in 18. 1858.— 1 in 15. 

1853.— 1 in 28. 1856.— 1 in 15. 1859.— 1 in 9. 

1854.— 1 in 17. 1857.— 1 in 13. I860.— 1 in 8. 

1861.— 1 in 8. 1 

This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for 
the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker 
of lies among the Free Trade bagmen of Germany. 

The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the 
lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in 
England. The branches that we are now about to examine, 
solely with regard to those of the workpeople who work at 
home, and not those who work in manufactories or ware- 
houses, fall into two divisions, viz. (1), finishing; (2), mending. 
The former ogives the finishing touches to the machine-made 
lace, and includes numerous sub-divisions. 

The lace finishing is done either in what are called " Mis- 
tresses' Houses," or by women in their own houses, with or 
without the help of their children. The women who keep the 
"Mistresses' Houses" are themselves poor. The workroom is 
in a private house. The mistresses take orders from manufac- 
turers, or from warehousemen, and employ as many women, 
girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and the 
fluctuating demand of the business will allow. The number 

1 Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep., p. xxii., n. 1G6. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 471 

of the workwomen employed in these workrooms varies from 
20 to 40 in some, and from 10 to 20 in others. The average 
age at which the children commence work is six years, but in 
many cases it is below five. The usual working hours are 
from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, with \\ hours 
for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often in 
the foul workrooms. When business is brisk, the labour fre- 
quently lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 
11, or 12 o'clock at night. In English barracks the regulation 
space allotted to each soldier is 500-G00 cubic feet, and in the 
military hospitals 1200 cubic feet. But in those finishing 
styes there are but G7 to 100 cubic feet to eacli person. At 
the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed by gas-lights. 
In order to keep the lace clean, and although the floor is tiled 
or flagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter, to 
pull off their shoes. " It is not at all uncommon in Notting- 
ham to find 14 to 20 children huddled together in a small 
room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and employed 
for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, 
from its weariness and monotony,and is besides carried on under 

every possible unwholesome condition Even the very 

youngest children work with a strained attention and a 
rapidity that is astonishing, hardly ever giving their -finger* 
rest or slowering their motion. If a question be asked them, 
they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing 
a single moment." The " long stick " is used by the mistresses 
as a stimulant more and more as the working hours are pro- 
longed " The children gradually tire and become as rest 
as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupa- 
tion that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhausting from 
the uniformity in the posture of the body. Their work IS like 
slavery." 1 When women and their children work at home, 
which now-a-days means in a hired room, often in a garret, 
the state of things is, if possible, still worse. This sort of 

work is given out within a circle <>i' 80 miles radius from Not- 

tingham. On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock 

night, the children are often Riven a bundle of lace to take 

* Ch. Einpl. C'omin., II. EUp., L864, |>p. iiv, u, \\i 



472 Capitalist Production. 

home with them and finish. The Pharisee of a capitalist 
represented by one of his servants, accompanies this action, of 
course, with the unctuous phrase : " That's for mother," yet he 
knows well enough that the poor children must sit up and help. 1 

Pillow lace making is chiefly carried on in England in two 
agricultural districts ; one, the Honiton lace district, extending 
from 20 to 30 miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and 
including a few places in North Devon ; the other comprising a 
great part of the counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and North- 
ampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and 
Huntingdonshire. The cottages of the agricultural labourers 
are the places where the work is usually carried on. Many 
manufacturers employ upwards of 3000 of these lace makers, 
who are chiefly children and young persons of the female sex 
exclusively. The state of things described as incidental to 
lace finishing is here repeated, save that instead of the " mis- 
tresses' houses," we find what are called " lace schools," kept by 
poor women in their cottages. From their fifth year and 
often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth year, the children 
Avork in these schools ; during the first year the very young 
ones work from four to eight hours, and later on, from six in 
the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night. " The rooms 
are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cottages, the 
chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept 
warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in 
winter. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like 
small store-rooms without fire-places The overcrowd- 
ing in these dens and the consequent vitiation of the air are 
often extreme. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, 
privies, decomposing substances, and other filth usual in the 
purlieus of the smaller cottages." With regard to space : " In 
one lace school 18 girls and a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each 
person ; in another, where the smell was unbearable, 18 per- 
sons and 1\\ cubic feet per head. In this industry are to be 
found employed children of 2 and 2^ years." 2 

Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and 
Bedford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part 

1 !• c -> PP« X3 "-i **vi. 2 L c., pp. xxix., xxx. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 473 

)f Hertfordshire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. 
In 1861, there were 40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting 
and straw-hat making; of these 3815 were males of all a_ 
the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 7000 children, 
were under 20 years of age. In the place of the lace-schools 
we find here the M straw-plait schools." The children com- 
mence their instruction in straw-plaiting generally in their 
4th, often between their 3rd and 4th year. Education, of 
course, they get none. The children themselves call the ele- 
mentary schools, " natural schools," to distinguish them from 
these blood-sucking institutions, in which they are kept at 
work simply to get through the task, generally 30 yards daily, 
prescribed by their half-starved mothers. These same mothers 
often make them work at home, after school is over, till 10, 11, 
and 12 o'clock at ni^ht. The straw cuts their mouths, with 
which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. Dr. 
Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of 
medical officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum 
space proper for each person in a bedroom or work-room. But 
in the straw-plait schools space is more sparingly allotted than 
in the lace-schools, "12}, 17, 18 J and below 22 cubic feet 
for each person." The smaller of these numbers, says one of 
the commissioners, Mr. White, represents less space than the half 
of what a child would occupy if packed in a box measuring 3 
feet in each direction. Thus do the children enjoy life till the 
age of 12 or 14. The wretched half-starved parents think of 
nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. 
The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, 
and naturally BO, for their parents, and leave them. " It 18 no 
wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population 
brought up. . . . Their morality is at the Lowest ebbj 
. . . a great number of the women have illegitimate children, 
«*i nd that at such an immature age that even those most con- 
versant \vi<h criminal statistics are astounded." 1 And the 
native land of these model families is tin' pattern Christian 
country f<>r Europe; bo says at. least Count Mnntalemberti 1 
tamly a competent authority on Christianity ! 

1 1. c. i>i>. xl. xli 



474 Capitalist Production. 

Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (tin 
maximum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in 
rare cases to 3 shillings), are reduced far below their nominal 
amount by the prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but 
especially in the lace districts. 1 

e. Passage of modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into 
Modern Mechanical Industry. The hastening of this revo- 
lution by the application of the Factory Acts to those 
Industries. 

The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the 
labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every nor- 
mal condition requisite for working and living, and by the 
sheer brutality of over-work and night-work, meets at last 
with natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. So also, 
when based on these methods, do the cheapening of com- 
modities and capitalist exploitation in general. So soon as 
this point is at last reached — and it takes many years — the 
hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the 
thenceforth rapid conversion of the scattered domestic indus- 
tries and also of manufactures into factory industries. 

An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is 
afforded by the production of wearing apparel. This industry, 
according to the classification of the Childrens' Employment 
Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, 
cap-makers, tailors, milliners and dressmakers, shirt-makers, 
corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers, besides many minor 
branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars, &c. In 
18G1, the number of females employed in these industries, in 
England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 115,242 at 
the least were under 20, and 16,650 under 15 years of age. 
The number of these workwomen in the United Kingdom in 
1861, was 750,334. The number of males employed in Eng- 
land and Wales, in hat-making, shoe-making, glove-making and 
tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years, 89,285 
between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. Many of the 

i Child. Empl. Comm. I. Rep. 1863, p. 185. 



Machinery and Modern Industry, 475 

smaller branches are not included in these figures. But take 
the figures as they stand ; we then have for England and 
Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 
1,024,277 persons, about as many as are absorbed by agricul- 
ture and cattle breeding. We begin to understand what be- 
comes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the 
magic of machinery, and of the enormous masses of work- 
people, which that machinery sets free. 

The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in 
manufactories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction 
of that division of labour, the membra disjecta of which were 
found ready to hand ; partly by small master-handicraftsmen ; 
these, however, do not, as formerly, work for individual con- 
sumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such an 
extent that often whole towns and stretches of country carry 
on certain branches, such as shoe-making, as a speciality ; 
finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, 
who form an external department of the manufactories, ware- 
houses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters. 1 

The raw material, &c, is supplied by mechanical industry, 
the mass of cheap human material (taillable a merci ct misori- 
corde) is composed of the individuals " liberated" by mechanical 
industry and improved agriculture. The manufactures of this 
class owed their origin chiefly to the capitalist's need of having 
at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of 
demand. 2 These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the 
scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue to 
exist as a broad foundation. The great production of surplus- 
value in these blanches of labour, and the progressive cheapen- 
ing of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum 
wages paid, no more than requisite for a miserable vegetation, 
and to the extension of working time up to the maximum en- 
durable by the human organism. It was in fact by 1 1 1 » - 

1 In England millinery and dressmaking are for the most pait carried on, on th<« 
premises of the employer, partly hy workwomen who live tin re, partly hy w 
who live off the premises. 

2 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory that < nip' 
1000 to 1'JOO persons, almost all females, and a ihot manufactory uitii LSOO pinuM ; 
of these nearly one half wen.- children and youm; persons. 



476 Capitalist Production, 

cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which 
were converted into commodities, that the markets were 
constantly being extended, and continue daily to be extended ; 
more especially was this the case with England's colonial 
markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits prevail. At 
last the critical point was reached. The basis of the old 
method, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the workpeople, 
accompanied more or less by a systematic division of labour, 
no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still 
more rapidly extending competition of the capitalists. The 
hour struck for the advent of machinery. The decisively 
revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal 
degree the whole of the numberless branches of this sphere of 
production, dressmaking, tailoring, shoe-making, sewing, hat- 
making, and many others, is the sewing-machine. 

Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all 
machinery, w T hich, since the rise of modern industry, has seized 
upon new branches of trade. Children of too tender an age are 
sent adrift. The wage of the machine hands rises compared 
with that of the house-workers, many of whom belong to the 
poorest of the poor. That of the better situated handicraftsmen, 
with whom the machine competes, sinks. The new machine 
hands are exclusively girls and young women. With the help 
of mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male 
labour had of the heavier work, and they drive off from the 
lighter work numbers of old women and very young children. 
The overpowering competition crushes the weakest of the 
manual labourers. The fearful increase in death from starvation 
during the last 10 years in London runs parallel with the 
extension of machine sewing. 1 The new workwomen turn the 
machines by hand and foot, or b} r hand alone, sometimes sitting, 
sometimes standing, according to the weight, size, and special 
make of the machine, and expend a great deal of labour-power. 
Their occupation is unwholesome, owing to the long hours, 
although in most cases they are not so long as under the old 

1 An instance. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar General dated 26th 
Feb., 1804, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. On the same day the " Times " 
reports another case. Six victims of starvation in one week ! 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 477 

system. Wherever the sewing machine locates itself in narrow 
and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwhole- 
some influences. " The effect," says Mr. Lord, " on entering 
low-ceiled workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands are 
working is unbearable. . . . The heat, partly due to the 

gas stoves used for warming the irons, is horrible 

Even when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning 
till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons 
fall into a swoon regularly every day." ' 

The revolution in the industrial methods which is the 
necessary result of the revolution in the instruments of pro- 
duction, is effected by a medley of transition forms. These 
forms vary according to the extent to which the sewing 
machine has become prevalent in one branch of industry or the 
other, to the time during which it has been in operation, to the 
previous condition of the workpeople, to the preponderance of 
manufacture, of handicrafts or of domestic industry, to the rent 
of the workrooms, &c. In dressmaking, for instance, where 
the labour for the most part was already organised, chiefly by 
simple co-operation, the sewing machine at first formed merely 
a new factor in that manufacturing industry. In tailoring, 
shirtmaking, shoemaking, &C., all the forms are intermingled. 
Here the factory system proper. There middlemen receive 
the raw material from the capitalist en chef, and group around 
their sewing machines, in " chambers" and "garrets," from 10 
U> ')() or more workwomen. Finally, as is always the case with 
machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can 
also be used in dwarfish proportions, handicraftsmen and 
domestic workers, along with their families, or with a little 
extra labour from without, make use of their own sewing 
machines. 1 The system actually prevalent in England is, thai 

1 Child. BmpL Oomra., Second Rep., LS64, i>. lwii. n. 406 9, 1-. 84, n. 124, p. IxsJli. 
11. 441, p. 86, n. 6, p, 84, n. 126, p. 78, n. 85, ]>. 76, a. 69, p. Ixxil n. 18& 

3 " The rente] of premises required foe workroom Menu the element wbioh 
ultimately determinei the point ; ml consequently it is in the metropolis, tint the 
old system of giving workout to mill employer! end families lias been longest ro« 
teined, end earliest retnrned to. M (1. 0. p. 88, n. 128.) The oonelnding statement in 
tins quotation ref( n exoln li i ly to shoemaking, 

■In glore-making and other Industries where the oondition of the workpeo] 
Lanlly distinguishable from that of this do 1 not occur. 



478 Capitalist Production. 

the capitalist concentrates a large number of machines on his 
premises, and then distributes the produce of those machines 
for further manipulation amongst the domestic workeis. 1 The 
variety of the transition forms, however, does not conceal the 
tendency to conversion into the factory system proper. This 
tendency is nurtured by the very nature of the sewing 
machine, the manifold uses of which push on the concentration, 
under one roof, and one management, of previously separated 
branches of a trade. It is also favoured by the circumstance 
that preparatory needlework, and certain other operations, are 
most conveniently done on the premises where the machine is 
at work ; as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand 
sewers, and of the domestic workers who work with their own 
machines. This fate has already in part overtaken them. 
The constantly increasing amount of capital invested in sewing 
machines, 2 gives the spur to the production of, and gluts the 
markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving the signal 
to the domestic workers for the sale of their machines. The 
overproduction of sewing machines themselves, causes their 
producers, in bad want of a sale, to let them out for so much a 
week, thus crushing by their deadly competition the small 
owners of machines. 3 Constant changes in the construction of 
the machines, and their ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate 
day by day the older makes, and allow of their being sold in 
great numbers, at absurd prices, to large capitalists, who alone 
can thus employ them at a profit. Finally, the substitution of the 
steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all similar revolutions, 
the finishing blow. At first, the use of steam power meets 
with mere technical difficulties, such as unsteadiness in the 
machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and 
tear of the lighter machines, &c, all of which are soon overcome 
by experience. 4 If, on the one hand, the concentration of 
many machines in large manufactories leads to the use of steam 

1 1. c. p. 2, n. 122. 

2 In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 1864, 800 
eewing machines already in use. 

s L c. p. 84, n. 124. 

4 Instances : The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt factory of 
Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory of Messrs. Tait at 
Limerick which employs about 1200 hands. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 479 

power, on the other hand, the competition of steam with 
human muscles hastens on the concentration of workpeople and 
machines in large factories. Thus England is at present ex- 
periencing, not only in the colossal industry of making wearing 
apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned above, the 
conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic work 
into the factory system, after each of those forms of production, 
totallv changed and disorganized under the influence of modern 
industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the 
horrors of the factory system, without participating in any of 
the elements of social progress it contains. 1 

This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, 
is artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts 
to all industries in which women, young persons and children 
are employed. The compulsory regulation of the working 
day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the sys- 
tem of ralays of children, the exclusion of all children under a 
certain age, &c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery 3 
and the substitution of steam as a motive power in the place 
of muscles. 3 On the other hand, in order to make up for the 
loss of time, an expansion occurs of the means of production 
used in common, of the furnaces, buildings, &c. ; in one word, 
greater concentration of the means of production and a .corres- 
pondingly greater concourse of workpeople. The chief objec- 
tion, repeatedly and passionately urged on behalf of each 

1 "Tendency to factory system" (1. c. p. lxvii). "The whole employment is at 
tins time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same change as that eff< 
in the lace trade, weaving, &c." (1. c. n. 405.) "A complete revolution " (1. c. p. 
xlvi. n. 318). At the date of the Child. Empl. Comm. of 1840, stocking making was 
still done hy manual lahour. Since 184 I various sorts of machines have bei in intra 
daoed, which are now driven hy steam. The total number of prisons of both mm i 
and of a'l ages from 3 years upwards, employed in stocking making in England, «.is 
in 1802 about 129,000. Of these only 4063 were, according to the Parliamentary 
Return of the 11th February, L862, working under the Factory Acts. 

2 Thus, e. % 7.,in the earthenware trade, Messrs. Cochrane, of the Britain Pottery, 

Glasgow, report i " To keep up our quantity we have gone extensively i to machines 

wrought by unskilled labour, and every day convinces us that we can prod 
greater quantity than by the old method." (" Hep. of Insp. of Fact., 8 1 1\ Oe( .1 
p. 13.) "The effect of the Fact. Acts is to force on the further introduction of 
machinery " (1. c, p. 13-14). 

a Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great it; 
power-jiggers U place of hand-moved jigger* 



4 So Capitalist Production. 

manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact this, 
that in order to continue the business on the old scale a 
greater outlay of capital will be necessary. But as regards 
labour in the so-called domestic industries and the inter- 
mediate forms between them and Manufacture, so soon as 
limits are put to the working day and to the employment of 
children, those industries go to the wall. Unlimited exploita- 
tion of cheap labour-power is the sole foundation of their 
power to compete. 

One of the essential conditions for the existence of the fac- 
tory system, especially when the length of the working day is 
fixed, is certainty in the result, i.e., the production in a given 
time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful 
effect. The statutory pauses in the working day, moreover, 
imply the assumption that periodical and sudden cessation of 
the work does no harm to the article undergoing the process of 
production. This certainty in the result, and this possibility 
of interrupting the work are, of course, easier to be attained 
in the purely mechanical industries than in those in which 
chemical and physical processes play a part ; as, for instance, 
in the earthenware trade, in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and \w 
most of the metal industries. Wherever there is a working 
day without restriction as to length, wherever there is night 
work and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest 
obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the 
better is soon looked upon as an everlasting barrier erected by 
Nature. No poison kills vermin with more certainty than the 
Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers. No one made 
a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends 
the earthenware manufacturers. In 18C4, however, they were 
brought under the Act, and within sixteen months every " im- 
possibility " had vanished. "The improved method," called 
forth by the Act, " of making slip by pressure instead of by 
evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware 
in its green state, &c, are each events of great importance in 
the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding 
century could not rival It has even considerably re- 
duced the temperature of the stoves themselves with a consi- 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 481 

derable saving of fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware." 1 
In spite of every prophecy, the cost price of earthenware did 
not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent 
that the export for the twelve months, ending December, 
18C5, exceeded in value by £138,628 the average of the pre- 
ceding three years. In the manufacture of matches it was 
thought to be an indispensable requirement, that boys, even 
while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches 
in melted phosphorus, the poisonous vapour from which rose 
into their faces. The Factory Act (180 4-) made the saving of 
time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping 
machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact 
with the workers. 2 So, at the present time, in those branches 
of the lace manufacture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is 
maintained that the meal times cannot be regular owim; to 
the different periods required by the various kinds of lace for 
drying, which periods vary from three minutes up to an hour 
and more. To this the Children's Employment Commissioners 
answer: " The circumstances of this case are precisely analo- 
gous to that of the paper-stainers, dealt with in our first 
report Some of the principal manufacturers in the trade 
urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials used, 
and their various processes, they would be unable, without 
serious loss, to stop for meal times at any given moment l)ut 
it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous 
arrangement, the apprehended dilliculty would be got over ; 
and accordingly, by clause G of section of the Factory Acts 
Extension Act, passed during this Session of Parliament, an 
interval of eighteen months is given to them from the passing 
of the Act before they are required to conform to the meal 
hours, specified l»y the Factory Acts." 1 Hardly had the Act 
been passed when our friends the manufacturers found out: 
"The inconveniences wo expected to arise from the introduc- 

1 " Report of [nip. of Feet., KUt Oct, 188&," pp. M and 127. 
- The Introduction <>f tbii tod other meohipi rj Into moteh-mek 1 
department elone 230 young p< i »n to b n plnoed by 82 boj - and girli of 1 1 I 
i iving in Inboui itm onniod s till further In L865, bj kh< 
of •teem po 
8 "Oh, BmpL ( '..mm., II. Sep ■ I •'*■«■" p. U., a. r>0. 

2 ii 



482 Capitalist Production. 

lion of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am 
happy to say, have not arisen. We do not find the produc- 
tion at all interfered with ; in short, we produce more in the 
same time." 1 It is evident that the English legislature, which 
certainly no one will venture to reproach with being over- 
dosed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclu- 
sion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away 
all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the 
process, to the restriction and regulation of the working day. 
Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given 
industry, a period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed 
within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove 
all technical impediments to the working of the Act. Mira- 
beau's "Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bete de mot!" is 
particularly applicable to modern technology. But though 
the Factory Acts thus artificially ripen the material elements 
necessary for the conversion of the manufacturing system into 
the factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the neces- 
sity they impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on 
the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of 
capital. 2 

Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable 
by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople 
themselves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. 
This is especially the case where piece wage predominates, 
and where loss of time in one part of the day or week can be 
made good by subsequent overtime, or by night work, a pro- 
cess which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his wife 
and children/ Although this absence of regularity in the 

1 " Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865," p. 22. 

2 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried out fully 
in some establishments, are by no means general, and are not capable of being 
brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an expenditure of capital 
beyond the means of many of the present occupiers." " I cannot but rejoice," writes 
Sub-Insp. May, "that notwithstanding the temporary disorganization which inevi- 
tably follows the introduction of such a measure (as the Factory Act Extension Act), 
and is, indeed, directly indicative of the evils which it was intended to remedy, &c." 
(Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 18G5.) 

3 With blast furnaces, for instance, " work towards the end of the week being 
generally much increased in duration in consequence of the habit of the men of 
idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of Tuesday also." 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 483 

expenditure of labour-power is a natural and rude reaction 
against the tedium of monotonous drudgery, it originates, also, 
to a much greater degree from anarchy in production, anarchy 
that in its turn pre-supposes unbridled exploitation of labour- 
power by the capitalist. Besides the general periodic changes 
of the industrial cycle, and the special fluctuations in the 
markets to which each industry is subject, we may also reckon 
what is called " the season," dependent either on the perio- 
dicity of favourable seasons of the year for navigation ; or on 
fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to 
be executed in the shortest possible time. The habit of giving 
such orders becomes more frequent witli tbe extension of 
railways and telegraphs. " The extension of the railway sys- 
tem throughout the country has tended very much to en- 
courage giving short notice. Purchasers now come up from 
Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh once every fortnight or 
so to the wholesale city warehouses which we supply, and 
give small orders requiring immediate execution, instead of 
buying from stock as they used to do. Years ago we were 
always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet the 
demand of the next season, but now no one can say before- 
hand what will be the demand then." 1 

In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject 
to the Factory Aces, the most fearful overwork prevails 
periodically during what is called the season, in consequence of 
sudden orders. In the outside department of the factory, of 
the manufactory, and of the warehouse, the so-called domestic 
workers, whose employment is at the best irregular, are en- 
tirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the 
caprice of the capitalist, who, in this industry, is not hampered 

(Ohild. Kmpl. Comm., III. Bep., p. vi.) "The little matten generally bare verj 
Irregular hoars. They lose two or three days, and then work all oighl t<> make il 

w|> Tiny always employ their own <hil<li<n, if they hav.- ;my ." il. 0., p 

vii.) "Tin- w.uiL of regularity in ooming to work, encouraged by the possibility snd 

practice <>f making up for this by working longer hours." (1. c, p. wni.) " [a B 

mingham .... an snormoui amount <»f time i« lost .... Ullin 
slaving the rest." (1. c, p. xi.) 

' "Child Rmpl, Ciiinin., iv. Rap., p. xxxii.,'' " The sttsnritm of ti 
tarn is said to have contributed greatly to this custom <>f giving redden orders, and 
the oonsequent hurry, neglect of meal times, tad late boon of th< \M-rkp«. 
(1. C, p. ijud.) 



4^4 Capitalist Production, 

by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery, 
and risks nothing by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the 
worker himself. Here then he sets himself systematically to 
work to form an industrial reserve force that shall be ready at a 
moment's notice ; during one part of the year he decimates this 
force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part, he lets 
it starve for want of work. " The employers avail themselves 
of the habiti al irregularity in the home-work, when any extra 
work is wanted at a push, so that the work goes on till 11, and 
12 p.m. or 2 a.m., or as the usual phrase is, "all hours," and 
that in localities where " the stench is enough to knock you 
down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but shudder to 
go further." 1 " They are curious men," said one of the 
witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of the masters, " they think 
it does a boy no harm to work too hard for half the year, if he 
is nearly idle for the other half." 2 

In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those 
" usages which have grown with the growth of trade " were and 
still are proclaimed by interested capitalists as obstacles due tu 
the nature of the work. This was a favourite cry of the 
cotton lords at the time they were first threatened with the 
Factory Acts. Although their industry more than any othei 
depends on navigation, yet experience has given them the lie. 
Since then, every pretended obstruction to business has been 
treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham. 3 The 
thoroughly conscientious investigations of the Children's Em- 
ployment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation 
of the hours of work, in some industries, was to spread the 
mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the 
whole year ; 4 that this regulation was the first rational bridle 

i Ch. Empl. Oomm. IV. Rep. p. xxxv. n. 235, 237. 

2 Oh. Empl. Comm. IV. Rep. p. 127. n. 56. 

3 "With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping orders in time, 
T remember that this was the pet argument of the factory masters in 1832 and 1833. 
Nothing that can be advanced now on this subject, could have the force that it had 
then, before steam had halved all distances and established new regulations for 
transit. It quite failed at that time of proof when put to the test, and again it will 
certainly fail should it have to bo tried." (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1802, 
pp. 54., 55. 

J Ch Empl. Comm. IV. Rep. p. xviii. n. 118. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 485 

on the murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion, 1 caprices 
that consort so badly with the system of modern industry ; 
that the development of ocean navigation and of the mean- of 
communication generally, has swept away the technical basis 
on which season-work was really supported, 2 and that all other 
so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger build- 
ings, additional machinery, increase in the number of work- 
people employed, 5 and the alterations caused by all these in the 
mode of conducting the wholesale trade. 4 But for all that, 
capital never becomes reconciled to such changes — and this is 
admitted over and over again by its own representatives — ex- 
cept " under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament " 5 for 
the compulsory regulation of the hours of labour. 

SECTION 9. — THE FACTORY ACTS. SANITARY AND EDUCATION CLAUSES OF THE 
SAME. THEIR GENERAL EXTENSION IN ENGLAMD. 

Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical re- 

1 John Bellers remarked as far back as IGOli : " The uncertainty of fashions dot I 
increase necessitous poor. It has two great mischiefs in it. 1st, The journeymen are 
miserable in winter for want of work, the mercers and master weavers not daring to 
lay out their stocks to keep the journeymen employed before the spring comes, am! 
they know what the fashion will then be : 2ndly, In the spring the journeymen are 
not sufficient, but the master-weavers must draw in many prentices, that they may 
supply the trade of the kingdom in a quarter or half a year, which robs the [dough of 
hands, drains the country of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with 
beggare, and starves some in winter that are ashamed to beg." (Essays about the 
Poor, Manufactures, &c, p. 1). ) 

2 Oh. Empl. Comm. V. Rep. p. 171, n. 34. 

1 The evidence of som<- Bradford export-houses iR as follows : "Under these cir- 
cumstances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked longer than from 8 a.m. to 
7 or 7.30 p.m., in making up. It is merely a question of extra hands and extra cut 
lay. If some matter! were not so greedy, the boys would not work late; an • 
machine costs only €H> or €1S ; much of such overtime as does occur is to be reft n I I 
to an insufficiency of appliances, and a want of space." Oh, Empl. Comm. V. Rep. 

p. 171, n. 31, 86, 88. 

4 1. c. A London manufacturer, who in other respects looks upon the OOmpoieorj 
i • ■ illation of the hours of labour as a proteotioii for the workpeople againei the menu- 

facturers, ami for the manufacturers tln-niselves against the wholesale trade, ti 
'* The pressure in our business is caused by tie shippers, who want, t .•/., to send the 
goods by tailing \< Mel so as to reach their destination at ■ given season and at tin- 
same time want, to pocket the difference In freight betweeu a eeilinj mda 
steamship, or who select the earlier of two steamships Inordei to be in th< 

market before tin n c unpet it «.rs. " 

8 "This could he obviate I, 'eej m • manufiai torer, "at I netofaa • 

int nt of tin work- under the pre . i sj A< t <>f Pal liem< L« p. a. 1 



486 Capitalist Production. 

action of society against the spontaneously developed form of 
the process of production, is, as we have seen, just as much 
the necessary product of modern industry as cotton yarn, self- 
actors, and the electric telegraph. Before passing to the con- 
sideration of the extension of that legislation in England, we 
shall shortly notice certain clauses contained in the Factory 
Acts, and not relating to the hours of work. 

Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the 
capitalist to evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely 
meagre, and, in fact, limited to provisions for whitewashing the 
walls, for insuring cleanliness in some other matters, for ven- 
tilation, and for protection against dangerous machinery. In 
the third book we shall return again to the fanatical opposition 
of the masters to those clauses which imposed upon them a 
slight expenditure on appliances for protecting the limbs of 
their workpeople, an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring 
light on the free trade dogma, according to which, in a society 
with conflicting interests, each individual necessarily furthers 
the common weal by seeking nothing but his own personal 
advantage ! One example is enough. The reader knows that 
during the last 20 years, the flax industry has very much ex- 
tended, and that, with that extension, the number of scutching 
mills in Ireland has increased. In 1864 there were in that 
country 1800 of these mills. Regularly in autumn and winter 
women and " young persons," the wives, sons, and daughters of 
the neighbouring small farmers, a class of people totally unac- 
customed to machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the 
rollers of the scutching mills with flax. The accidents, both as 
regards number and kind, are wholly unexampled in the history 
of machinery. In one scutching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, 
there occurred between 1852 and 1856, six fatal accidents and 
sixty mutilations ; every one of which might have been pre- 
vented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of a few shillings. 
Dr. W. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at Down- 
patrick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December, 
1865 : " The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the 
most fearful nature. In many cases a quarter of the body is 
torn from the trunk, and either involves death, or a future of 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 487 

wretched incapacity and suffering. The increase of mills in 
the country will, of course, extend these dreadful results, and 
it will be a great boon if they are brought under the legislature. 
I am convinced that by proper supervision of scutching mills 
a vast sacrifice of life and limb would be averted." 1 

What could possibly show better the character of the capi- 
talist mode of production, than the necessity that exists for 
forcing upon it, by Acts of Parliament, the simplest appliances 
for maintaining cleanliness and health ? In the potteries the 
Factory Act of 18G4 " has whitewashed and cleansed upwards 
of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from any such 
cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely," (this 
is the "abstinence" of the capitalist!) "in which were employed 
27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and 
often nights of labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which 
rendered an otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation 
pregnant with disease and death. The Act has improved the 
ventilation very much." 2 At the same time, this portion of 
the Act strikingly shows that the capitalist mode of production, 
owing to its very nature, excludes all rational improvement 
beyond a certain point. It has been stated over and over 
a^ain that the English doctors are unanimous in declaring 
that where the work is continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very 
least space that should be allowed for each person. Now, if 
the Factory Acts, owing to their compulsory provisions, in- 
directly hasten on the conversion of small workshops into 
factories, thus indirectly attacking the proprietary rights of the 
smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly to the great ones, so, 
if it were made obligatory to provide the proper space for each 
workman in every workshop, thousands of small employers 
would, at one full swoop, be expropriated directly! The very 
root of the capitalist mode of production, ?>., the sclf-cxpan- 
sion of all capital, large OT small, by means of the "free" pur- 
chase and consumption of labour-power, would be attacked 
Factory legislation Lb therefore brought to a dead-lock befor 
these 500 cubic feet of breathing space. The sanitary offic 

1 1. c. p. xv. n. 7'2. R'l'i- 

•B«p. [asp. took, SUI Ocftobw, 1886, y. 197 



488 Capitalist Prodtiction. 

the industrial inquiry commissioners, the factory inspectors, all 
harp, over and over again, upon the necessity for those 500 
cubic feet, and upon the impossibility of wringing them out of 
capital. They thus, in fact, declare that consumption and 
other lung diseases among the workpeople are necessary con- 
ditions to the existence of capital. 1 

Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the 
whole, yet they proclaim elementary education to be an indis- 
pensable condition to the employment of children. 2 The suc- 
cess of those clauses proved for the first time the possibility of 
combining education and gymnastics 3 with manual labour, and, 
consequently, of combining manual labour with education and 
gymnastics. The factory inspectors soon found out by ques- 
tioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although 
receiving only one half the education of the regular day 
scholars, yet learnt quite as much and often more. " This can 
be accounted for by the simple fact that, with only being at 
school for one half of the day, they are always fresh, and 
nearly always ready and willing to receive instruction. The 
system on which they work, half manual labour, and half 
school, renders each employment a rest and a relief to the 
other ; consequently, both are far more congenial to the child, 

1 It has been found out by experiment, that with each respiration of average in- 
tensity made by a healthy average individual, about 25 cubic inches of air are con- 
sumed, and that about 20 respirations are made in each minute. Hence the air 
inhaled in 24 hours by eich individual is about 720,000 cubic inches, or 416 cubic 
feet. It is clear, however, that air which has been once breathed, can no longer 
serve for the same process until it has been purified in the great workshop of Nature. 
According to the experiments of Valentin and Brunner, it appears that a healthy 
man gives off about 1300 cubic inches of carbonic acid per hour ; this would give 
about 8 ounces of solid carbon thrown off from the lungs in 24 hours. " Every man 
should have at least 800 cubic feet." (Huxley.) 

2 According to the English Factory Act, parents cannot send their children under 
14 years of age into Factories under the control of the Act, unless at the same time 
they allow them to receive elementary education. The manufacturer is responsible 
fo r compliance with the Act. " Factory education is compulsory, and it is a con- 
dition of labour." (Rep. Insp. Fact. 31st Oct., 1863, p. 111. 

3 On the very advantageous results of combining gymnastics (and drilling in the 
case of boys) with compulsory education for factory children and pauper scholars, 
see the speech of N. W. Senior at the seventh annual congress of "The National 
Association for the Fromotion of Social Science," in " Report of Proceedings, &c, 
Lond. 1863," p. 63, 64, also the Rep. Lisp. Fact., 31st Oct., 1865, p. 118, 119, 120, 126 
B(|q. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 489 

than would be the case were he kept constantly at one. It is 
quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the morning, 
cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who comes 
fresh and bright from his work." 1 Further information on this 
point will be found in Senior's speech at the Social Science 
Congress at Edinburgh in 18G3. He there shows, amongst 
other things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school 
hours of the children of the upper and middle classes, use- 
lessly add to the labour of the teacher, " while he not only 
fruitlessly but absolutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, 
and energy of the children." 2 From the Factory system 
budded, as Robert Owen has shown us in detail, the germ of 
the education of the future, an education that will, in the case 
of every child over a given age, combine productive labour 
with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of the 
methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the 
only method of producing fully developed human beings. 

Modern Industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by techni- 
cal means the manufacturing division of labour, under which 
each man is bound hand and foot for life to a single detail- 
operation. At the same time, the capitalistic form of that in- 
dustry reproduces this same division of labour in a still more 
monstrous shape ; in the factory proper, by converting the 
workman into a living appendage of the machine; and every - 

1 Rep. Insp. Fact. 31st Oct. 18G5, p. 118. A silk manufacturer naively states to 
the Children! 1 Employment Commissioners: "I am quite sure that the true Men I 
of producing efficient workpeople is to be found in uniting education ami labour from 

a pel iod of childhood. Of course the occupation must not be too severe, nor irksome, 
or unhealthy. Hut. of the advantage of the union I have no doubt. I wish my own 
children could have some work as well as play to give variety to their schooling." 

(Ch. Empl Ooram, v. i;, -p. p. S3 n. 86.) 

-Senior, 1. c. p. 66. How Modern Industry, wlien it has attained to a certain 

pitch, is capable, by tin: revolution it effeoU in tlie mode of prodnotion and in the 

social conditions of production, of also revolutionizing peopled mind-, is Strikingly 
shown by a comparison of Senior's speech in L863, with his philippi ' the 

Factory Act of 1888 ; or by a comparison, of the views of the < ferred 

to, with the fact that In certain country distriotsof England pool parents are foi 

bidden, 00 pain of death by starvation, to educate their children. Thus, r.</., Mi. 

Bnell reports il to be a common occurrence in Somersetshire that, when a poo: 
son claims parish relief, be i* compelled to take his ohildren from school Mi 
Wollarton, the clergyman ai Peltham, also tells ol where all relief was .; 

to certain families " b tding theh ohildren to school ! H 



49° Capitalist Production . 

where outside the Factory, partly by the sporadic use of 
machinery and machine workers, 1 partly by re-establishing the 
division of labour on a fresh basis by the general introduction 
of the labour of women and children, and of cheap unskilled 
labour. 

The antagonism between the manufacturing division of 
labour and the methods of Modern Industry makes itself 
forcibly felt. It manifests itself, amongst other ways, in the 
frightful fact that a great part of the children employed in 
modern factories and manufactures, are from their earliest 
years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and exploited 
for years, without being taught a single sort of work that 
would afterwards make them of use, even in the same manu- 
factory or factory. In the English letter press printing trade, 
for example, there existed formerly a system, corresponding to 
that in the old manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the 
apprentices from easy to more and more difficult work. They 
went through a course of teaching till they were finished 
printers. To be able to read and write was for every one of 
them a requirement of their trade. All this was changed by 
the printing machine. It employs two sorts of labourers, one 
grown up, tenters, the other, boys mostly from 11 to 17 years 
of age whose sole business is either to spread the sheets of 
paper under the machine, or to take from it the printed sheets. 
They perform this weary task, in London especially, for 14, 15, 
and 16 hours at a stretch, during several days in the week, and 
iiequently for 36 hours, with only 2 hours' rest for meals and 
sleep ! 2 A great part of them cannot read, and they are, as a 

1 Wherever handicraft-machines, driven by men, compete directly or indirectly 
with more developed machines driven by mechanical power, a great change takes 
place with regard to the labourer who drives the machine. At first the steam-engine 
replaces this labourer, afterwards he must replace the steam-engine. Consequently 
the tension and the amount of labour-power expended become monstrous, and 
especially so in the case of the children who are condemned to this torture. Thus 
Mr Longe, one of the commissioners, found in Coventry and the neighbourhood boys 
of from 10 to 15 years employed in driving the ribbon looms, not to mention younger 
children who had to drive smaller machines. "It is extraordinarily fatiguing work. 
The boy is a mere substitute for steam-power." (Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep. I860, p. 
!14, n. G.) As to the fatal consequences of " this system of slavery," as the official 
report styles it, see 1. c. p. 114 sqq. 

-' 1. c. p. 3, n. 24. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 491 

rule, utter savages and very extraordinary creatures. " To 
qualify them for the work which they have to do, they require 
no intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, ami 
less for judgment; their wages, though rather high for boys, do 
not increase proportionately as they grow up, and the majority 
of them cannot look for advancement to the better paid and 
more responsible post of machine minder, because while each 
machine has but one minder, it has at least two, and often four 
boys attached to it." 1 As soon as they get too old for such 
child's work, that is about 17 at the latest, they are discharged 
from the printing establishments. They become recruits of 
crime. Several attempts to procure them employment else- 
where, were rendered of no avail by their ignorance and 
brutality, and by their mental and bodily degradation. 

As with the division of labour in the interior of the 
manufacturing workshops, so it is with the division of 
labour in the interior of society. So long as handicraft 
and manufacture form the general groundwork of social 
production, the subjection of the producer to one branch 
exclusively, the breaking up of the multifariousness of his 
employment, 2 is a necessary step in the development. On 
that ground-work each separate branch of production acquires 
empirically the form that is technically suited to it,- slowly 
perfects it, and, so soon as a given degree of maturity has 
been reached, rapidly crystallizes that form. The only thing, 
that here and there causes a change, besides new raw material 
supplied by commerce, is the gradual alteration of the instru- 
ments of labour. But their form, too, once definitely settled 
by experience, petrifies, as is proved by their being in many 
cases handed down in the same form by one generation to 

1 1. c. p. 7., n. no. 

' l " In some parts of tho Highland* of Scotland, not many years igO, 01 iy peasant, 

according to the Statistical Account,, made bii own shoes of leather tanned bj bin 
self. Many a thepherd and eottar too, with his wife and children, appeal 

Church in clothes which had hecn touched hy no hands hut their own. since they 
were shorn from the sheep nnd sown in the fliixfield. In the preparation of th< • _ 

it is added, •oareelj a tingle artiole bad hecn pnrohaoed, exoepl the awl, needle, 

thimble, and a very few parts of the iron-work employed in the wearing. The 

too, wore chiefly extracted hy tho women from treex, fdiruhs and hafbt* (lhi^ahl 

Stewart'i Works. Hamilton's I'M., Vol. viii p. H? 828.) 



49 2 Capitalist Production. 

another during thousands of years. A characteristic feature 
is, that, even down into the eighteenth century, the different 
trades were called " mysteries " (mysteres) - ; into their secrets 
none but those duly initiated could penetrate. Modern In- 
dustry rent the veil that concealed from men their own social 
process of production, and that turned the various, spontane- 
ously divided branches of production into so man}* riddles, not 
only to outsiders, but even to the initiated. The principle 
which it pursued, of resolving each process into its constituent 
movements, without any regard to their possible execution by 
the hand of man, created the new modern science of technology. 
The varied, apparently unconnected, and petrified forms of the 
industrial processes now resolved themselves into so many 
conscious and systematic applications of natural science to the 
attainment of given useful effects. Technology also discovered 
the few main fundamental forms of motion, which, despite the 
diversity of the instruments used, are necessarily taken by 
every productive action of the human body ; just as the science 
of mechanics sees in the most complicated machinery nothing 
but the continual repetition of the simple mechanical powers. 

Modern Industry never looks upon and treats the existing 
form of a process as final. The technical basis of that industry 
is therefore revolutionary, while all earlier modes of produc- 
tion were essentially conservative. 2 By means of machinery, 

1 In the celebrated "Livre des metiers " of Etienne Boileau, we find it prescribed 
that a journeyman on being admitted among the masters had to swear " to love his 
brethren with brotherly love, to support them in their respective trades, not wilfully 
to betray the secrets of the trade, and besides, in the interests of all, not to recom- 
mend his own wares by calling the attention of the buyer to defects in the articles 
made by others." 

2 "The bourgeoisie cannot exist without continually revolutionizing the instru- 
ments of production, and thereby the relations of production and all the social 
relations. Conservation, in an unaltered form, of the old modes of production was 
on the contrary the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. 
Constant revolution in production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, 
everlasting uncertainty and agitation, distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all 
earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and 
venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new formed ones become 
antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is 
profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions 
of life, and his relations with his kind. (F. Engels and Karl Marx : Manifest der 
Kommunistischeu Partei. Lond. 184S, p. 5.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 493 

chemical processes and other methods, it is continually causing 
changes not only in the technical basis of production, but also 
in the functions of the labourer, and in the social combinations 
of the labour-process. At the same time, it thereby also 
revolutionizes the division of labour within the society, and 
incessantly launches masses of capital and of workpeople from 
one branch of production to another. But if Modern Industry, 
by its ver} r nature, therefore necessitates variation of labour, 
fluency of function, universal mobility of the labourer, on the 
other hand, in its capitalistic form, it reproduces the old 
division of labour with its ossified particularisations. We 
have seen how this absolute contradiction between the techni- 
cal necessities of Modern Industry, and the social character 
inherent in its capitalistic form, dispels all fixity and security 
in the situation of the labourer ; how it constantly threatens, 
by taking away the instruments of labour, to snatch from his 
hands his means of subsistence, 1 and, by suppressing his detail- 
function, to make him superfluous. We have seen, too, how 
this antagonism vents its ra<xe in the creation of that monstro- 
sity, an industrial reserve army, kept in misery in order to be 
always at the disposal of capital ; in the incessant human 
sacrifices from among the working class, in the most reckless 
squandering of labour- power, and in the devastation caused by 
a social anarchy which turns every economical progress into a 
Bocial calamity. This is the negative side. But if, on the one 
hand, variation of work at present imposes itself after the 
manner of an overpowering natural law, and with the blindly 
destructive action of a natural law that meets with resis- 
tance 1 at all points, Modern Industry, on the other hand, 

1 " You take mj life 

When you do take the means whereby T live." Bkauspeabs, 

\ I': Qoh workman, on hie return from San Franoisoo, writes ai follows; "I 
r oould have believed, thai [wi of working at the various oooupatione 1 

was employed on in California. I was Irmly eonvinoed that 1 was tit t >i uothiug 
hut lettei press printing. . . . Once in the midst of this world of adventui 
who chin. on as often as they <h> their .shirt, egad, I di 1 as tl 

As mining did not turn out. reraun n. 1 left it for the town, ■ 

Mioeeaiion 1 became typographer, later, plumber, fco. I Ihus 

finding out thai [ am fit for any sort ofwo Ic, I f < 
rata.* 1 1 A. Oourbon, De l'onseigneraent pi inel, 24me ed 



494 Capitalist Production. 

through its catastrophes imposes the necessity of recognising, 
as a fundamental law of production, variation of work, conse- 
quently fitness of the labourer for varied work, consequently 
the greatest possible development of his varied aptitudes. It 
becomes a question of life and death for society to adapt the 
mode of production to the normal functioning of this law. 
Modern Industry, indeed, compels society, under penalty of 
death, to replace the detail-worker of to-day, crippled by life- 
long repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus 
reduced to the mere fragment of a man, by the fully developed 
individual, fit for a variety of labours, ready to face any 
change of production, and to whom the different social func- 
tions he performs, are but so many modes of giving free scope 
to his own natural and acquired powers. 

One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this 
revolution is the establishment of technical and agricultural 
schools, and of " e'coles d'enseignement professionnel," in which 
the children of the working-men receive some little instruction 
in technology and in the practical handling of the various 
implements of labour. Though the Factory Act, that first and 
meagre concession wrung from capital, is limited to combining 
elementary education with work in the factory, there can be 
no doubt that when the working class comes into power, as 
inevitably it must, technical instruction, both theoretical and 
practical, will take its proper place in the working-class 
schools. There is also no doubt that such revolutionary 
ferments, the final result of which is the abolition of the old 
division of labour, are diametrically opposed to the capitalistic 
form of production, and to the economic status of the labourer 
corresponding to that form. But the historical development of 
the antagonisms, immanent in a given form of production, is the 
only way in which that form of production can be dissolved 
and a new form established. " Ne sutor ultra crepidam " — 
this nee plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, 
from the moment the watchmaker Watt invented the steam- 
engine, the barber Arkwright, the throstle, and the working- 
jeweller, Fulton, the steamship. 1 

1 John Boilers, a very phenomenon in the history of political economy, saw most 



Machinery and Modern Industry, 495 

So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulatm" 
the labour in factories, manufactories, &c., it is regarded as a 
mere interference with the exploiting rights of capital. But 
when it comes to regulating the so-called "home-labour," 1 it is 
immediately viewed as a direct attack on the patria potestas, 
on parental authority. The tender-hearted English Parlia- 
ment long affected to shrink from taking this step. The force 
of facts, however, compelled it at last to acknowledge that 
modern industry, in overturning the economical foundation on 
which was based the traditional family, and the family labour 
corresponding to it, had also unloosened all traditional family 
ties. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed. The 
final report of the Ch. Empl. Comm. of 1866, states : " It is un- 
happily, to a, painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of 
the evidence, that against no persons do the children of both 
sexes so much require protection as against their parents." The 
system of unlimited exploitation of childrens' labour in general 
and the so-called home-labour in particular is u maintained only 
because the parents are able, without check or control, to 
exercise this arbitrary and mischievous power over their young 

and tender offspring Parents must not possess the 

absolute power of making their children mere 'machines to 
earn so much weekly wage.' .... The children and 
young persons, therefore, in all such cases may justifiably 
claim from the legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption 
should be secured to them, from what destroys prematurely 
their physical strength, and lowers them in the scale of in- 

clearly at the end of the 17th century, the necessity for abolishing the present lysteni 
of education and division of labour, which beget hypertrophy ami atrophy at tin 1 
two opposite extremities of society. Amongst other things he says this : " An idle 
learning being little better than the learning of idleness . . . Bodily labour, it's a 
primitive institution of God . . . Labour being as proper for the bodies' health as 
eating is for its living ; for what pains a man saves by ease, he will find in «li> 
.... Labour adds oyl to the lamp of life, when thinking inflames it ... . 
A childish silly employ " (a warning this, by presentiment, against the BaeodoWl 
and their modern imitators) '"ha\'s the ehildreu's minds silly." (PropOBtJa for 
raising a colledge of industry of all useful trades and husbandry. Lond., L696, p. 12, 
14, IS.) 

1 This sort of labour goes on mostly in small woikshops, as we have seen in the 
lace making and stiaw plaiting trades, and M could be shown iiioio in detail from 

the metal trades of Sheiheld, Birmingham, <Sic 



496 Capitalist Production. 

tellectual and moral beings." ! It was not, however, the misuse 
of parental authority that created the capitalistic exploitation, 
whether direct or indirect, of children's labour ; but, on the 
contrary, it was the capitalistic mode of exploitation which, by 
Bweeping away the economical basis of parental authority, made 
its exercise degenerate intoa mischievous misuse of power. How- 
ever terrible and disgusting the dissolution, under the capitalist 
system, of the old family ties may appear, nevertheless, modern 
industry, by assigning as it does an important part in the 
process of production, outside the domestic sphere, to women, 
to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new 
economical foundation for a higher form of the family and of 
the relations between the sexes. It is, of course, just as absurd 
to hold the Teutonic-christian form of the family to be absolute 
and final as it would be to apply that character to the ancient 
Roman, the ancient Greek, or the Eastern forms which, more- 
over, taken together form a series in historic development. 
Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of the collective working 
group being composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages, 
must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a source of 
humane development; although in its spontaneously developed, 
brutal, capitalistic form, where the labourer exists for the process 
of production, and not the process of production for the labourer, 
that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery. 2 

The necessity for a generalization of the Factory Acts, for 
transforming them from an exceptional law relating to 
mechanical spinning and weaving — those first creations of 
machinery — into a law affecting social production as a whole, 
arose, as we have seen, from the mode in which Modern 
Industry was historically developed. In the rear of that 
industry, the traditional form of manufacture, of handicraft, 
and of domestic industry, is entirely revolutionised ; manufac- 
tures are constantly passing into the factory system, and 
handicrafts into manufactures ; and lastly, the spheres of handi- 

1 Ch. EmpL Comm., V. Rep., p. xxv., n. 1G2, and II. Rep., p. xxxviii., n. 
285> 289, p. xxv., xxvi., n. 191. 

- " Factory labour may ho as pure and as excellent as domestic labour, and perhaps 
more so." (Hop. Insp. Fact., 31st October, 1SG5, p. L27.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 497 

craft and of the domestic industries become, in a, comparatively 
speaking, wonderfully short time, dens of misery in which 
capitalistic exploitation obtains free play for the wildest 
excesses. There are two circumstances that finally turn the 
scale : first, the constantly recurring experience that capital, so 
soon as it finds itself subject to legal control at one point, 
compensates itself all the more recklessty at other points ; 1 
secondly, the cry of the capitalists for equality in the conditions 
of competition, i.e., for equal restraint on all exploitation of 
labour. 2 On this point let us listen to two heart-broken cries. 
Messrs. Cooksley of Bristol, nail and chain, &c, manufacturers, 
spontaneously introduced the regulations of the Factory Act 
into their business. "As the old irregular system prevails in 
neighbouring works, the Messrs. Cooksley are subject to the 
disadvantage of having their boys enticed to continue their 
labour elsewhere after 6 p.m. ' This/ they naturally say, ' is 
an unjustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a portion of the boy's 
strength, of which we ought to have the full benefit.'" 3 Mr. 
J. Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before 
the commissioners of the Ch. Empl. Comm. : " He would sign 
any petition for it " (legislative interference) . . . . "As 
it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his 
place, lest others should be working later than him and getting 
away his orders." 4 Summarising, the Ch. Empl. Comm. says; 
" It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories 
should be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour 
in the smaller places in their own branch of business were 
under no legislative restriction. And to the injustice arising 
from the unfair conditions of competition, in regard to hours, 
that would be ereated if the smaller places of work were 
mpt, would be added the disadvantage to the larger manu- 
facturers, of finding their supply of juvenile and female labour 
drawn off to the places of work exempt from legislation. 
Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the 
smaller places of work, which are almost invariably the lea^t 

1 Rtp. In.sp. of Fact., 31 at October, 1865, p. 27-32. 

3 NuincroiiH instances will he found in Rep. of Insp. of Fact. 

■ Oh, BmpL Oomm., v. i;. p., p. x., n. I 

4 Ch. BmpL Oomm., v. Rtp., p. i*., n. 28 

'J i 



49 S Capitalist Production. 

favourable to the health, comfort, education, and general im- 
provement of the people." x 

In its tinal report the Commission proposes to subject to the 
Factory Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and 
women, of which number about one half are exploited in small 
industries and by the so-called home-work. 2 It says, " But if 
it should seem tit to Parliament to place the whole of that 
large number of children, young persons and females under the 
protective legislation above adverted to .... it cannot be 
doubted that such legislation would have a most beneficent 
effect, not only upon the young and the feeble, who are its 
more immediate objects, but upon the still larger body of adult 
workers, who ^ould in all these employments, both directly 
and indirectly, come immediately under its influence. It 
would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours ; it 
would lead to their places of work being kept in a healthy and 
cleanly state ; it would therefore husband and improve that 
store of physical strength on which their own well-being and 
that of the country so much depends ; it would save the rising 
generation from that over-exertion at an early age which 
undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay; 
finally, it would ensure them — at least up to the age of 13 — 
the opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and 
would put an end to that utter ignorance ... so faithfully 
exhibited in the Reports of our Assistant Commissoners, and 
which cannot be regarded without the deepest pain, and a pro- 
found sense of national degradation." 3 

1 1. c, p. xxv., n. 165-167. As to the advantages of large scale, compared with 
small scale, industries, see Ch. Empl. Comm., III. Rep., p. 13, n. 144, p. 25, n. 121, 
p. 26, n. 125, p. 27, n. 140, &c. 

2 The trades proposed to be brought under the Act were the following : Lace- 
making, stocking-weaving, straw-plaiting, the manufacture of wearing apparel with 
its numerous subdivisions, artificial flower-making, shoemaking, hat-making, glove- 
making, tailoring, all metal works, from blast furnaces down to needleworks, &c, 
paper-mills, glass-works, tobacco factories, india-rubber works, braid-making (for 
weaving), hand-carpet-making, umbrella and parasol making, the manufacture of 
spindles and spools, letter-press printing, book-binding, manufacture of stationery 
(including paper bags, cards, coloured paper, &c.,) rope-making, manufacture of jet 
ornaments, brick-making, silk manufacture by hand, Coventry weaving, salt works, 
tallow chandlers, cement works, sugar refineries, biscuit-making, various industries 
connected with timber, and other mixed trades. 

3 1. c. p xxv. u. 16'J. 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 499 

Twenty-four years before, another Commission of Inquiry on 
the labour of children had alreadj^, as Senior remarks, dis- 
closed " the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and 
cruelty on the part of masters and of parents, and of juvenile 
and infantile misery, degradation and destruction ever pre- 
sented. ... It may be supposed that it describes the 
horrors of a past age. But there is unhappily evidence that 
those horrors continue as intense as they were. A pamphlet 
published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states that the 
abuses complained of in 1 842, are in full bloom at the present 
day. It is a strange proof of the general neglect of the 
morals and health of the children of the working class, that 
this report lay unnoticed for 20 years, during which the 
children, ' bred up without the remotest sign of comprehension 
as to what is meant by the term morals, who had neither 
knowledge, nor religion, nor natural affection,' were allowed to 
become the parents of the present generation." 1 

The social conditions having undergone a change, Parliament 
could not venture to shelve the demands of the Commission of 
1862, as it had done those of the Commission of 1840. Hence 
in 1864, when the Commission had not yet published more 
than a part of its reports, the earthenware industries (in- 
cluding the potteries), makers of paper-hangings, matches, 
cartridges, and caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to 
the Acts in force in the textile industries. In the speech from 
the Throne, on oth February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the 
day announced the introduction of Bills, founded on the final 
recommendations of the Commission, which had completed its 
labours in L8b'6. 

On the loth August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, 
and on the 21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act re- 
ceived the Royal Assent; the former Act having reference t«> 
large industries, the latter to small. 

The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron and copper mills, 
foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha 
works, paper mills, glass works, tobacco manufactories, letter- 
press printing (including newspapers) book-binding, in short 

1 BeaiOT, Social BflUaOt ( ungrt'HS, pp, .'. 



500 Capitalist Production. 

to all industrial establishments of the above kind, in which 50 
individuals or more are occupied simultaneously, and for not 
less than 100 days during the year. 

To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the 
Workshops' Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its 
interpretation clause, the following passages : 

11 Handicraft shall mean any manual labour exercised by 
way of trade, or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the 
making any article or part of an article, or in, or incidental to, 
the altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise 
adapting for sale any article." 

" Workshop shall mean any room or place whatever in the 
open air or under cover, in which any handicraft is carried on 
by any child, young person, or woman, and to which and over 
which the person by whom such child, young person, or woman 
is employed, has the right of access and control." 

" Employed shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether 
for wages or not. under a master or under a parent as herein 
defined." 

" Parent shall mean parent, guardian, or peison. having 
the custody of, or control over, any . . . child or young 
person." 

Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of 
children, young persons, and women, contrary to the provisions 
of the Act, subjects to fines, not only the occupier of the work- 
shop, whether parent or not. but even " the parent of, or the 
person deriving any direct benefit from the labour of, or having 
the control over, the child, young person or woman." 

The Factory Acts Extension Act. which affects the large 
establishments, derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of 
vicious exceptions and cowardly compromises with the masters. 

The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, 
remained a dead letter in the hands of the municipal and 
local authorities who were charged with its execution. When, 
in 1871. Parliament withdrew from them this power, in order 
to confer it on the Factory Inspectors, to whose province it 
thus added by a single stroke more than one hundred thousand 
workshops, and three hundred brickworks, care was taken at 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 501 

the same time not to add more than eight assistants to their 
already undermanned staff. 1 

What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, 
on the one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of 
the ruling classes, of adopting in principle measures so extra- 
ordinary, and on so great a scale, against the excesses of 
capitalistic exploitation ; and on the other hand, the hesitation, 
the repugnance, and the bad faith, with which it lent itself to 
the task of carrying those measures into practice. 

The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regu- 
lation of the mining industry, an industry distinguished from 
others by the exceptional characteristic that the interests of 
landlord and capitalist there join hands. The antagonism of 
these two interests had been favourable to Factory legislation, 
while on the other hand the absence of that antagonism is 
sufficient to explain the delays and chicanery of the legislation 
on mines. 

The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so 
terrible, so shocking, and creating such a scandal all over 
Europe, that to salve its conscience Parliament passed the 
Mining Act of 1812, in which it limited itself to forbidding 
the employment underground in mines of children under 10 
years of age and females. 

Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, pro- 
vides that mines shall be inspected by public officers 
nominated specially for that purpose, and that boys between 
the ages of 10 and 12 years shall not be employed, unless they 
have a school certificate, or go to school for a certain number of 
hours. This Act was a complete dead letter owing to the 
ridiculously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of their 
powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we 
proceed. 

One of the most recent blue books on mines is the " Report 
from the Select Committee on Mines, together with &C 

1 The M personnel " of this staff consisted of 2 inspectors, 2 assistant inspectors and 
41 sub inspectors. Eight additional sub-inspectors were appointed in 1S71. The 
total cost of administering the Acts in England, Scotland, and Ii< land amounted for 
tho ye;ir 1*71 72 to no more than £25,847| inclusive of the law expenses lmuiud \>y 
prosecutions of offending uuibUis. 



502 Capitalist Production. 

Evidence, 23rd July, 1866." This Report is the work of a 
Parliamentary Committee selected from members of the House 
of Commons, and authorised to summon and examine witnesses. 
It is a thick folio volume in which the Report itself occupies 
only five lines to this effect; that the committee has nothing 
to say, and that more witnesses must be examined ! 

The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the 
cross-examination of witnesses in English courts of justice, 
where the advocate tries, by means of impudent, unexpected, 
equivocal and involved questions, put without connexion, to 
intimidate, surprise, and confound the witness, and to give a 
forced meaning to the answers extorted from him. In this 
inquiry the members of the committee themselves are the 
cross-examiners, and among them are to be found both mine 
owners and mine exploiters ; the witnesses are mostly working 
coalminers. The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit 
of capital, not to call for a few extracts from this Report. For 
the sake of conciseness I have classified them. I may also 
add that every question and its answer are numbered in the 
English Blue Books. 

I. EMPLOYMENT IN MINES OF BOYS OF 10 YEAKS AND UP- 
WARDS. In the mines the work, inclusive of going an( j re _ 
turning, usually lasts 14 or 15 hours, sometimes even from 3, 
4, and 5 o'clock a.m., till 5 and 6 o'clock p.m., (n. 6., 452, 83). 
The adults work in two shifts, of eight hours each ; but there 
is no alteration with the boys, on account of the expense 
(n. 80, 203, 204). The younger boys are chiefly employed in 
opening and shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts 
of the mine ; the older ones are employed on heavier work, in 
carrying coal, &c. (n. 122, 739, 1747). They work these long 
hours underground until their 18th or 22nd year, when they 
are put to miner's work proper, (n. 161.) Children and young 
persons are at present worse treated, and harder worked than 
at any previous period (n. 1663 — 1667). And now Hussey 
Vivian (himself an exploiter of mines) asks: "Would not the 
opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the 
workman's family ? " Mr. Bruce : " Do you not think it would be 
a very hard case, where a parent had been injured, or where 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 503 

lie was sickly, or where a father was dead, and there was only 
a mother, to prevent a child between 12 and 14 earning Is. 7d. 
a day for the good of the family ? . . . You must lay 
down a general rule ? . . . Are you prepared to recom- 
mend legislation which would prevent the employment of 
children under 12 and 14, whatever the state of their parents 
might be?" "Yes." (ns. 107-110). Vivian :" Supposing that an 
enactment were passed preventing the employment of 
children under the age of 14, would it not be probable that 

. . . the parents of children would seek employment for 
their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture ?" 
"Not generally I think," (n. 174). Kinnaird : "Some of the 
boys are keepers of doors ? " " Yes." " Is there not generally 
a very great draught every time you open a door or close it ? " 
" Yes, generally there is." " it sounds a very easy thing, 
but it is in fact rather a painful one ? " " He is imprisoned 
tli ere just the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol." Bourgeois 
Vivian : " Whenever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he 
read ? " " Yes, he can read, if he finds himself in candles 
. . . I suppose he would be found fault with if he were 
discovered reading; he is there to mind his business, he has a 
duty to perform, and he has to attend to it in the first place, 
and I do not think it would be allowed down the pit." 
(ns. 139, 141, 143, 158, 1G0.) 

II. education. — The working miners want a law for the 
compulsory education of their children, as in factories. They 
declare the clauses of the Act of 18G0, which require a school 
certificate to be obtained before employing boys of 10 and 12 
years of age, to be quite illusory. The examination of the 
witnesses on this subject is truly droll. " Is it (the Act) 
required more against the masters or against the parents ? " 
' Jt is required against both I think." "You cannot say 
whether it is required against one more than against the 
other ? " " No ; I can hardly answer that question." (ns. 115, 
1 Hi.) " Does there appear to be any desire on the part of the 
employers that the boys should have such hours as to enable 
them to iro to school?" " No : the hours are never shortened 
for that purpose." (n. 137.) Mr. Kinnaird: "Should you say 



504 Capitalist Production. 

that the colliers generally improve their education ; have you 
any instances of men who have, since they began to work, 
greatly improved their education, or do they not rather go 
back, and lose any advantage that they may have gained ? " 
" They generally become worse : they do not improve ; they 
acquire bad habits ; they get on to drinking and gambling and 
such like, and they go completely to wreck." (n. 211). "Do 
they make any attempt of the kind (for providing instruction) 
by having schools at night ? " " There are few collieries 
where night schools are held, and perhaps at those collieries a 
few boys do go to those schools ; but they are so physically 
exhausted that it is to no purpose that they go there." 
(n. 454.) " You are then," concludes the bourgeois, " against 
education ?" "Most certainly not ; but," &c. (n. 443.) " But 
are they (the employers) not compelled to demand them " 
(school certificates) ? " By law they are ; but I am not aware 
that they are demanded by the employers." " Then it is' your 
opinion, that this provision of the Act as to requiring certifi- 
cates, is not generally carried out in the collieries ? " " It is 
not carried out." (ns. 443, 444.) " Do the men take a great in- 
terest in this question " (of education) ? " The majority of them 
do." (n. 717.) "Are they very anxious to see the law en- 
forced?" "The majority are." (n. 718.) "Do you think 
that in this country any law that you pass. . . . can 
really be effectual unless the population themselves assist in 
putting it into operation ? " " Many a man might wish to ob- 
ject to employing a boy, but he would perhaps become marked 
by it." (n. 720.) " Marked by whom ? " " By his employers." 
(n. 721.) " Do you think that the employers would find any 
fault with a man who obeyed the law. . . ? " "I believe 
they would." (n. 722.) " Have you ever heard of any work- 
man objecting to employ a boy between 10 and 12, who could 
not write or read?" "It is not left to men's option." (n. 
123 ) " Would you call for the interference of Parliament ? " 
" I think that if anything effectual is to be done in the edu- 
cation of the colliers' children, it will have to be made compul- 
sory by Act of Parliament." (n. 1634.) " Would you lay that 
obligation upon the colliers only, of all the work people of 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 505 

Great Britain?" "I came to speak for the colliers." 
(n. 1636.) " Why should you distinguish them (colliery boys) 
from other boys ? " " Because I think they are an exception 
to the rule." (n. 1638.) " In what respect ? " " In a physical 
respect." (n. 1639.) " Why should education be more valuable 
to them than to other classes of lads ?" "I do not know that 
it is more valuable ; but through the over-exertion in mines 
there is less chance for the boys that are employed there to get 
education, either at Sunday schools, or at day schools." 
(n. 1640.) " It is impossible to look at a question of this sort 
absolutely by itself ? " (n. 1644.) "Is there a sufficiency of 
schools ? "— " No " . . . (n. 1646). " If the state were to 
require that every child should be sent to school, would there 
be schools for the children to go to ?" " No ; but I think if the 
circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forth- 
coming." (n. 1647.) " Some of them (the boys) cannot read 
and write at all, I suppose ? " " The majority cannot. . . . 
The majority of the men themselves cannot." (ns. 705, 725). 

III. employment OF women. — Since 1842 women are no 
more employed underground, but are occupied on the surface 
in loading the coal, &c, in drawing the tubs to the canals and 
railway waggons, in sorting, &c. Their numbers have consider- 
ably increased during the last three or four years, (n. 1727.) 
They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of the 
working miners, and their a^es range from 12 to 50 or 60 
years, (ns. 645, 1779.) u What is the feeling among the 
working miners as to the employment of women ? " "I think 
they generally condemn it." (n. 648.) " What objection do 
you see to it ? " "I think it is degrading to the sex." (n. 
649.) "There is a peculiarity of dress?" "Yes ... it is 
rather a man's dress, and I believe in some cases, it drowns all 
sense of decency." " Do the women smoke ? " " Some do." 
u And I suppose it is very dirty work ? " " Very dirty." 
" They get black and grimy ? ' "As black as those who are 
down the mines ... I believe that a woman having children 
(and there are plenty on the banks that have) cannot do her 
duty to her children." (ns. 650-654 701.) "Do you think 
that those widows could get employment anywhere else, which 



506 Capitalist Production. 

would bring them in as much wages as that (from 8s. to 10s. a 
week) ? " "I cannot speak to that." (n. 709.) "\'ou would 
still be prepared, would you," (flint-hearted fellow ! ) " to pre- 
vent their obtaining a livelihood by these means? " " I would." 
(n. 710.) " What is the general feeling in the district ... as 
to the employment of women ? " " The feeling is that it is 
degrading ; and we wish as miners to have more respect to the 
fair sex than to see them placed on the pit bank . . . Some 
part of the work is very hard ; some of these girls have raised 
as much as 10 tons of stuff a day." (ns. 1715, 1717.) "Do 
you think that the women employed about the collieries are 
less moral than the women employed in the factories ? " "... 
the percentage of bad ones may be a little more . . . than with 
the girls in the factories." (n. 1237.) " But you are not quite 
satisfied with the state of morality in the factories ? " " No." 
(n. 1733 ) " Would you prohibit the employment of women in 
factories also ? " " No, I would not." (n. 1734.) " Why not ? " 
" I think it a more honourable occupation for them in the 
mills." (n. 1735.) "Still it is injurious to their morality, you 
think ? " " Not so much as working on the pit bank ; but it 
is more on the social position I take it ; I do not take it on its 
moral ground alone. The degradation, in its social bearing on 
the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. When these 400 or 
500 girls become colliers' wives, the men suffer greatly from 
this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and 
drink." (n. 1736.) " You would be obliged to stop the em- 
ployment of women in the ironworks as well, would you not, 
it you stopped it in the collieries ? " "I cannot speak for any 
other trade." (n. 1737.) "Can you see any difference in the 
circumstances of women employed in iron-works, and the 
circumstances of women employed above ground in collieries ? " 
" I have not ascertained anything as to that." (n. 1740.) 
" Can you see anything that makes a distinction between one 
class and the other ? " "I have not ascertained that, but I 
know from house to house visitation, that it is a deplorable 
state of things in our district. . . " (n. 1741.) " Would you 
interfere in every case with the employment of women where 
that employment was degrading ? " " It would become in- 



Machi7iery and Modern Industry. 507 

jurious, I think, in this way : the best feelings of Englishmen 
have been gained from the instruction of a mother . . ." (n. 
1750.) " That equally applies to agricultural employments, 
does it not ? " " Yes, but that is only for two seasons, and we 
have work all the four seasons." (n. 1751). " They often 
work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitu- 
tion, undermined and their health ruined." " You have not 
inquired into that subject perhaps ? " "I have certainly taken 
note of it as I have gone along, and certainly I have seen 
nothing parallel to the effects of the employment of women on 
the pit bank ... It is the work of a man ... a strong man." 
(ns. 1753, 1793, 1794) " Your feeling upon the whole subject 
is that the better class of colliers who desire to raise them- 
selves and humanise themselves, instead of deriving help from 
the women, are pulled down by them ? " " Yes." (n. 1808.) 
After some further crooked questions from these bourgeois, the 
secret of their " sympathy " for widows, poor families, &c, 
comes out at last. " The coal proprietor appoints certain 
irentlemen to take the oversight f the workings, and it is their 
policy, in order to receive approbation, to place things on the 
most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed 
at from Is. up to Is. Gd. a day, where a man at the rate of 2s. 
6d. a day would have to be employed." (n. 1810.) 

IV. coroner's inquests. — " With regard to coroner's in- 
quests in your district, have the workmen confidence in the 
proceedings at those inquests when accidents occur ? " " No j 
they have not." (n. 300.) " Why not ? " " Chiefly because 
the men who are generally chosen, are men who know nothing 
about mines and such like." " Are not workmen summoned 
at all upon the juries?" "Never but as witnesses to my 
knowledge." " Who are the people who are generally sum- 
moned upon these juries?" "Generally tradesmen in tin; 
neighbourhood .... from their circumstances they are some- 
times liable to be influenced by their employers .... the 
owners of the works. They are generally men who have no 
knowledge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who are 
called before them, and the terms which ;uv used and such 
like." " Would you have the jury composed of persons w QO 



5<dS Capitalist Production. 

had been employed in mining ? " " Yes, partly .... they (the 
workmen) think that the verdict is not in accordance with the 
evidence given generally." (ns. 361, 3G4, 36G, 368, 371, 375.) 
M One great object in summoning a jury is to have an impartial 
one, is it not ? " " Yes, I should think so." "Do you think 
that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a 
considerable extent of workmen ? " "I cannot see any motive 
which the workmen would have to act partially . . . they 
necessarily have a better knowledge of the operations in con- 
nection with the mine." " You do not think there would be a 
tendency on the part of the workmen to return unfairly severe 
verdicts ? " " No, I think not." (ns. 378, 379, 380.) 

V. false weights AND measures. — The workmen demand 
to be paid weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead 
of by cubical contents of the tubs ; they also demand protec- 
tion against the use of false weights, &c. (n. 1071.) " If the 
tubs were fraudulently increased, a man could discontinue 
working by giving 14 days' notice ? " "But if he goes to 
another place, there is the same thing going on there." (n. 
1071.) " But he can leave that place where the wrong has 
been committed ? " " It is general ; wherever he goes, he has 
to submit to it." (n. 1072.) " Could a man leave by giving 
14 days' notice ? " " Yes." (n. 1073.) And yet they are not 
satisiied ! 

VI. inspection of mines. — Casualties from explosions are 
not the only things the workmen surfer from. (n. 234, sqq.) 
" Our men complained very much of the bad ventilation of the 
collieries . . . the ventilation is so bad in general that the men 
can scarcely breathe ; they are quite unfit for employment of 
any kind after they have been for a length of time in connec- 
tion with their work ; indeed, just at the part of the mine 
where I am working, men have been obliged to leave their 
employment and come home in consequence of that .... 
some of them have been out of work for weeks just in conse- 
quence of the bad state of the ventilation where there is not 
explosive gas . . . there is plenty of air generally in the main 
courses, yet pains are not taken to get air into the workings 
where men are working." " Why do you not apply to the 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 509 

inspector ? " * To tell the truth there are many men who are 
timid on that point ; there have been cases of men being sacri- 
liced and losing their employment in consequence of applying 
to the inspector." " Why ; is he a marked man for having 
complained ? " " Yes." " And he finds it difficult to get em- 
ployment in another mine?" "Yes." "Do you think the 
mines in your neighbourhood are sufficiently inspected to 
insure a compliance with the provisions of the Act ? " " No ; 
they are not inspected at all . . . the inspector has been down 
just once in the pit, and it has been going seven years . . . 
In the district to which I belong there are not a sufficient 
number of inspectors. We have one old man more than 70 
years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries." " You wish 
to have a class of sub-inspectors?" "Yes." (ns. 234, 241, 
251, 254, 274, 275, 554, 276, 293.) But do you think it would 
be possible for government to maintain such an army of in- 
spectors as would be necessary to do all that you want them 
to do, without information from the men?" "No, I should 
think it would be next to impossible." ..." It would be 
desirable the inspectors should come oftener ? " " Yes, and 
without being sent for." (n. 280, 277.) " Do you not think 
that the effect of having these inspectors examining the 
collieries so frequently would be to shift the responsibility ( ! ) 
of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of the collieries 
to the Government officials ? " " No, I do not think that, I 
think that they should make it their business to enforce the 
Acts which are already in existence." (n. 285.) " When you 
Bpeak of sub-inspectors, do you mean men at a less salary, and 
of an inferior stamp to the present inspectors ? " "I would 
not have them inferior, if you could get them otherwise." (n. 
294.) "Do you merely want more inspectors, or do you want 
;i lower class of men as an inspector?" "A man who would 
knock about, and see that things are kept right ; a man who 
would not be afraid of himself." (n. 295.) " If you obtained 
your wish in getting an inferior diss of inspectors appointed, 
do you think that there would be no danger from want of skill, 
fee, \ * "I think not, I think that the Government would see 

aftor that, and have proper men in that position." (n. 2!)7.) 



r , IO 



J 



Capitalist Productio n . 



This kind of examination becomes at last too much even for 
the chairman of the committee, and he interrupts with the 
observation : " You want a class of men who would look into 
all the details of the mine, and would go into all the holes and 
corners, and go into the real facts . . . they would report to 
the chief inspector, who would then bring his scientific know- 
ledge to bear on the facts they have stated ?" (ns. 298, 299) 
" Would it not entail very great expense if all these old work- 
ings were kept ventilated ? " " Yes, expense might be in- 
curred, but life would be at the same time protected." (n. 
531.) A working miner objects to the 17th section of the Act 
of 1860 ; he says, " At the present time, if the inspector of 
mines finds a part of the mine unfit to work in, he has to report 
it to the mine owner and the Home Secretary. After doing 
that, there is given to the owner 20 days to look over the 
matter ; at the end of 20 days he has the power to refuse 
making any alteration in the mine : but, when he refuses, the 
mine owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time 
nominating five engineers, and from those five engineers named 
by the mine owner himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, 
I think, as arbitrator, or appoints arbitrators from them ; now 
we think in that case the mine owner virtually appoints his 
own arbitrator." (n. 581.) Bourgeois examiner, himself a 
mine owner : " But ... is this a merely speculative objection ?" 
(n. 586.) " Then you have a very poor opinion of the integrity 
of mining engineers ? " " It is most certainly unjust and in- 
equitable." (n. 588.) " Do not mining engineers possess a sort 
of public character, and do not you think that they are above 
making such a partial decision as you apprehend ? " "I do 
not wish to answer such a question as that with respect to the 
personal character of those men. I believe that in many cases 
they would act very partially indeed, and that it ought not to 
be in their hands to do so, where men's lives are at stake." 
(n. 589.) This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this 
question : " Do you not think that the mine owner also suffer* 
loss from an explosion ? " Finally, M Are not you workmen in 
Lancashire able to take care of your own interests without 
calling in the Government to help you ? " " No." (n. 1042.) 



Machinery and Modern Industry. 5 1 1 

In the year 1865 there were 3217 coal mines in Great 
Britain, and 12 inspectors. A Yorkshire mine owner himself 
calculates (" Times," 2Gth January, 1867), that putting on one 
side their office work, which absorbs all their time, each mine 
can be visited but once in ten years by an inspector. No 
wonder that explosions have increased progressively, both in 
number and extent (sometimes with a loss of 200-300 men), 
during the last ten years. 

The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that 
regulates the hours of labour of the children employed in 
mines, and makes exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, 
responsible for so-called accidents. 

The Royal Commission appointed in 1867, to inquire into 
the employment in agriculture of children, young persons, and 
women, has published some very important reports. Several 
attempts to apply the principles of the Factory Acts, but in a 
modified form, to agriculture have been made, but have so far 
resulted in complete failure. All that I wish to draw attention 
to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency towards the 
general application of those principles. 

If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades 
for the purpose of protecting the working class both in mind 
and body has become inevitable, on the other hand, as we 
have already pointed out, that extension hastens on the 
general conversion of numerous isolated small industries into a 
few combined industries carried on upon a large scale ; it there- 
fore accelerates the concentration of capital and the exclusive 
predominance of the factory system. It destroys both the 
ancient and the transitional forms, behind which the dominion 
of capital is still in part concealed, and replaces them by the 
direct and open sway of capital; but thereby it also generalises 
the direct opposition to this sway. While in each individual 
workshop it enforces uniformity, regularity, order, and 
economy, it increases by the immense spur which the limi- 
tation and regulation of the working day give to technical 
improvement, the anarchy and the catastrophes of capitalist 
production as a whole, the intensity of labour, and the com- 
petition of machinery with the labourer. By the destruction of 



5 1 2 Capitalist Production. 

petty and domestic industries it destroys the last resort of the 
" redundant population," and with it the sole remaining 
safety-valve of the whole social mechanism. By maturing the 
material conditions, and the combination on a social scale of 
the processes of production, it matures the contradictions and 
antagonisms of the capitalist form of production, and thereby 
provides, along with the elements for the formation of a new 
society, the forces for exploding the old one. 1 

SECTION 10. — MODERN INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE. 

The revolution called forth by modern industry in agricul- 
ture, and in the social relations of agricultural producers, will 
be investigated later on. In this place we shall merely indi- 
cate a few results by way of anticipation. If the use of 
machinery in agriculture is for the most part free from the 
injurious physical effect it has on the factory operative, its 
action in superseding the labourers is more intense, and finds 
less resistance, as we shall see later in detail. In the counties 
of Cambridge and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated 
land has extended very much within the last 20 years (up to 
1868), while in the same period the rural population has 
diminished, not only relatively, but absolutely. In the United 
States it is as yet only virtually that agricultural machines 
replace labourers; in other words, they allow of the culti- 
vation by the farmer of a larger surface, but do not actually 
expel the labourers employed. In 1861 the number of persons 
occupied in England and Wales in the manufacture of agricul- 
tural machines was 1034, whilst the number of agricultural 
labourers employed in the use of agricultural machines and 
steam engines did not exceed 1205. 

1 Robert Owen, the father of Co-operative Factories and Stores, but who, as before 
remarked, in no way shared the illusions of his followers with regard to the bear- 
ing of these isolated elements of transformation, not only practically made the fac- 
tory system the sole foundation of his experiments, but also declared that system 
to be theoretically the starting point of the social revolution. Herr Visscring, Pro- 
fessor of Political Economy in the University of Leyden, appears to have a suspicion 
of this when, in his " Handboek van Praktische Staatshuishoudkunde, 1860-62," 
which reproduces all the platitudes of vulgar economy, he strongly supports handi 
crafts against the factory system. 



'Machinery and Modern Industry. 513 

In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more 
revolutionary effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it 
annihilates the peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and 
replaces him by the wage labourer. Thus the desire for social 
changes, and the class antagonisms are brought to the same 
level in the country as in the towns. The irrational, old 
fashioned methods of agriculture are replaced by scientific 
ones. Capitalist production completely tears asunder the 
old bond of union which held together agriculture and manu- 
facture in their infancy. But at the same time it creates 
the material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, 
viz., the union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the 
more perfected forms they have each acquired during their 
temporary separation. Capitalist production, by collecting the 
population in great centres, and causing an ever increasing 
preponderance of town population, on the one hand concen- 
trates the historical motive-power of society ; on the other 
hand, it disturbs the circulation of matter between man and 
the soil, i.e., prevents the return to the soil of its elements con- 
sumed by man in the form of food and clothing ; it therefore 
violates the conditions necessary to lasting fertility of the 
soil. By this action it destroys at the same time the health 
of the town labourer and the intellectual life of the rural 
labourer. 1 But while upsetting the naturally grown condi- 
tions for the maintenance of that circulation of matter, it 
imperiously calls for its restoration as a system, as a re- 
gulating law of social production, and under a form appro- 
priate to the full development of the human race. In agri- 
culture as in manufacture, the transformation of production 
under the sway of capital, means, at the same time, the 
martyrdom of the producer ; the instrument of labour becomes 
the means of enslaving, exploiting, and impoverishing the 

1 "You divide the people into two hostile camps of clownish hoors and emascu- 
lated dwarfs. Good heavens 1 a nation divided into agricultural and commercial 
interests, calling itself sane ; nay, styling itself enlightened and civilized, not only 
in spite of, hut in consequence f thin monstrous and unnatural division." (David 
Urquhart, 1. c, p. 119.) This passage shows, at one and the same time, the- strength 
and the weakness of that kind of criticism which knows how to judge and condemn 
the present, but not how to comprehend it. 

a k 



514 Capitalist Production. 

labourer ; the social combination and organization of labour- 
processes is turned into an organised mode of crushing 
out the workman's individual vitality, freedom, and inde- 
pendence. The dispersion of the rural labourers over larger 
areas breaks their power of resistance while concentration 
increases that of the town operatives. In modern agriculture, 
as in the urban industries, the increased productiveness and 
quantity of the labour set in motion are bought at the cost of 
laying waste and consuming by disease labour-power itself. 
Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress 
in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the 
soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil for a 
given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of 
that fertility. The more a country starts its development on 
the foundation of modern industry, like the United States, 
for example, the more rapid is this process of destruction. 1 

1 See Liebig : " Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendungauf Agricultur und Physiologie, 7. 
Auflage, 18G2, " and especially the " Einleitung in die Naturgesetze des Feldbaus," 
in the 1st Volume. To have developed from the point of view of natural science, 
the negative, i.e., destructive side of modern agriculture, is one of Liebig's immortal 
merits. His summary, too, of the history of agriculture, although not free from 
gross errors, contains flashes of light. It is, however, to be regretted that he ven- 
tures on such hap-hazard assertions as the following: "By greater pulverising and 
more frequent ploughing, the circulation of air in the interior of porous soil is aided, 
and the surface exposed to the action of the atmosphere is increased and renewed ; 
but it is easily seen that the increased yield of the land cannot be proportional to 
the labour spent on that land, but increases in a much smaller proportion. This 
law," adds Liebig, " was first enunciated by John Stuart Mill in his ' Principles of 
Pol. Econ.', Vol. I., p. 17, as follows : ' That the produce of land increases, cceteris 
paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase of the labourers employed " (Mill 
here introduces in an erroneous form the law enunciated by Ricardo's school, for 
since the ' decrease of the labourers employed, 1 kept even pace in England with the 
advance of agriculture, the law discovered in, and applied to, England, could have no 
application to that country, at all events), " is the universal law of agricultural in- 
dustry.' This is very remarkable, since Mill was ignorant of the reason for this law." 
(Liebig, 1. c, Bd. I., p. 143 and Note.) Apart from Liebig's wrong interpretation of 
the word " labour," by which word he understands something quite different from what 
political economy does, it is, in any case, " very remarkable " that he should make 
Mr. John Stuart Mill the first propounder of a theory which was first published by 
James Anderson in A. Smith's days, and was repeated in various works down to the 
beginning of the 19th century ; a theory which Malthus, that master in plagiarism 
(the whole of his population theory is a shameless plagiarism), appropriated to 
himself in 1815 ; which "West developed at the same time as, and independently of, 
Anderson ; which in the year 1817 was connected by Ricardo with the general 
theory of value, then made the round of the world as Ricardo's theory, and in 



MacJiinery and Modern Industry. 5 : 5 

Capitalist production, therefore, developes technology, and the 
combining together of various processes into a social whole 
only by sapping the original sources of all wealth — the soil 
and the labourer. 

1820 was vulgarised by James Mill, the father of John Stuart Mill; and which, 
finally, was reproduced by John Stuart Mill and others, as a dogma already quite 
common-place, and known to every school -boy. It cannot be denied that John 
Stuart Mill owes his, at all events, " remarkable " authority almost entirely to such 
quid-pro-quos. 



PART V. 

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE AND OF 
RELATIVE SURPLUS- VALUE 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE SURPLUS- VALUE. 

IN considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter V.) 
by treating it in the abstract, apart from its historical 
forms, as a process between man and nature. We there stated, 
p. 1G0: "If we examine the whole labour-process, from the 
point of view of its result, it is plain that both the instruments 
and the subject of labour are means of production, and that 
the labour itself is productive labour." And in Note 2, same 
page, we further added : " This method of determining, from 
the standpoint of the labour-process alone, what is productive 
labour, is by no means directly applicable to the case of the 
capitalist process of production." We now proceed to the 
further development of this subject. 

So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the 
same labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on 
become separated. When an individual appropriates natural 
objects for his livelihood, no one controls him but himself. 
Afterwards he is controlled by others. A single man cannot 
operate upon nature without calling his own muscles into play 
under the control of his own brain. As in the natural body 
head and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process 
unites the labour of the hand with that of the head. Later on 
they part company and even become deadly foes. The product 
ceases to be the direct product of the individual, and becomes 



Absolute and Relative Surplus- Value. 5 1 7 

a social product, produced in common by a collective labourer, 
t.e., by a combination of workmen, each of whom takes only a 
part, greater or less, in the manipulation of the subject of their 
labour. As the co-operative character of the labour-process 
becomes more and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, 
does our notion of productive labour, and of its agent the pro- 
ductive labourer, become extended. In order to labour pro- 
ductively, it is no longer necessary for you to do manual work 
yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer, 
and perform one of its subordinate functions. The first defini- 
tion given above of productive labour, a definition deduced 
from the very nature of the production of material objects, still 
remains correct for the collective labourer, considered as a whole. 
But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually. 
On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour 
becomes narrowed. Capitalist production is not merely the 
production of commodities, it is essentially the production of 
surplus-value. The labourer produces, not for himself, but for 
capital. It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply 
produce. He must produce surplus- value. That labourer 
alone is productive, who produces surplus-value for the capita- 
list, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital. If we 
may take an example from outside the sphere of production of 
material objects, a schoolmaster is a productive labourer, when, 
in addition to belabouring the heads of his scholars, he works 
like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. That the latter 
has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a 
sausage factory, does not alter the relation. Hence the notion 
of a productive labourer implies not merely a relation between 
work and useful effect, between labourer and product of labour, 
but also a specific, social relation of production, a relation that 
has sprung up historically and stamps the labourer as the 
direct means of creating surplus-value. To be a productive 
labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune. 
In Book IV. which treats of the history of the theory, it will 
be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus-value has 
at all times been made, by classical political economists, the 

distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer. Hence 



5 1 8 Capitalist Production. 

their definition of a productive labourer changes with their 
comprehension of the nature of surplus- value. Thus the 
Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, 
since that alone, they say, yields a surplus-value. And they 
say so because, with them, surplus-value has no existence 
except in the form of rent. 

The prolongation of the working day beyond the point at 
which the labourer would have produced just an equivalent 
for the value of his labour-power, and the appropriation of 
that surplus-labour by capital, this is production of absolute 
surplus- value. It forms the general groundwork of the capita- 
list system, and the starting point for the production of relative 
surplus-value. The latter presupposes that the working day is 
already divided into two parts, necessary labour, and surplus- 
labour. In order to prolong the surplus-labour, the necessary 
labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for 
the wages is produced in less time. The production of ab- 
solute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length of the 
working day ; the production of relative surplus-value, revolu- 
tionises out and out the technical processes of labour, and the 
composition of society. It therefore presupposes a specific 
mode, the capitalist mode of production, a mode which, along 
with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and dev^lopes 
itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal 
subjection of labour to capital. In the course of this develop- 
ment, the formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection 
of labour to capital. 

It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, 
in which surplus-labour is not extorted by direct compulsion 
from the producer, nor the producer himself yet formally sub- 
jected to capital. In such forms capital has not yet acquired 
the direct control of the labour-process. By the side of inde- 
pendent producers who carry on their handicrafts and agricul- 
ture in the traditional old-fashioned way, there stands the 
usurer or the merchant, with his usurer's capital or merchant's 
capital, feeding on them like a parasite. The predominance, in 
a society, of this form of exploitation excludes the capitalist 
mode of production ; to which mode, however, this form may 



Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value. 519 

^erve as a transition, as it did towards the close of the Middle 
Ages. Finally, as is shown by modern " domestic industry," 
some intermediate forms are here and there reproduced in the 
background of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is 
totally changed. 

If, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to 
capital suffices for the production of absolute surplus-value, if, 
e.g., it is sufficient that handicraftsmen who previously worked 
on their own account, or as apprentices of a master, should 
become wage labourers under the direct control of a capitalist ; 
so, on the other hand, we have seen, how the methods of pro- 
ducing relative surplus- value, are, at the same time, methods of 
producing absolute surplus-value. Nay, more, the excessive 
prolongation of the working day turned out to be the peculiar 
product of Modern Industry. Generally speaking, the specifi- 
cally capitalist mode of production ceases to be a mere means 
of producing relative surplus- value, so soon as that mode has 
conquered an entire branch of production; and still more so, 
so soon as it has conquered all the important branches. It 
then becomes the general, socially predominant form of pro- 
duction. As a special method of producing relative surplus- 
value, it remains effective only, first, in so far as it seizes upon 
industries that previously were only formally subject to capital, 
that is, so far as it is propagandist ; secondly, in so far as the 
industries that have been taken over by it, continue to be 
revolutionized by changes in the methods of production. 

From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and re- 
lative surplus-value appears illusory. Relative surplus-value is 
absolute, since it compels the absolute prolongation of the work- 
ing day beyond the labour-time necessary to the existence of 
the labourer himself. Absolute surplus-value is relative, since 
it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness 
of labour, as will allow of the necessary labour-time being con- 
fined to a portion of the working day. But if we keep in 
mind the behaviour of surplus-value, this appearance of iden- 
tity vanishes. Once the capitalist mode of production es- 
tablished and become general, the difference between absolute 

and relative surplus-value makes itself felt, whenever there is 



520 Capitalist Production. 

a question of raising the rate of surplus- value. Assuming that 
labour-power is paid for at its value, we are confronted by this 
alternative : given the productiveness of labour and its normal 
intensity, the rate of surplus-value can be raised only by the 
actual prolongation of the working day ; on the other hand, 
given the length of the working day, that rise can be effected 
only by a change in the relative magnitudes of the components 
of the working day, viz., necessary labour and surplus-labour ; 
a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the value of 
labour-power, presupposes a change either in the productive- 
ness or in the intensity of the labour. 

If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary 
means of subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time 
left in which to work gratis for others. Without a certain de- 
gree of productiveness in his labour, he has no such superfluous 
time at his disposal ; without such superfluous time, no 
surplus-labour, and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners, no 
feudal lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors. 1 

Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural 
basis ; but this is permissible only in the very general sense, 
that there is no natural obstacle absolutely preventing one man 
from disburdening himself of the labour requisite for his own 
existence, and burdening another with it, any more, for in- 
stance, than unconquerable natural obstacles prevent one man 
from eating the flesh of another. 2 No mystical ideas must in 
any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this his- 
torically developed productiveness of labour. It is only after 
men have raised themselves above the rank of animals, when 
therefore their labour has been to some extent socialised, 
that a state of things arises in which the surplus-labour 
of the one . becomes a condition of existence for the other. 
At the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired 
by labour is small, but so too are the wants which 
develop with and by the means of satisfying them. 

1 "The very existence of the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is dependent 
on the productiveness of industry." (Ramsay, 1. c. p. 206.) "If each man's labour 
were but enough to produce his own food, there could be no property." (Raven - 
htone, 1. c. p. 14, 15). 

2 According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 cannibals in 
those parts of the earth which have already been explored. 



Absolute and Relative Surplus- Value. 521 

Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives 
on the labour of others is infinitely small compared with the 
mass of direct producers. Along with the progress in the 
productiveness of labour, that small portion of society in- 
creases both absolutely and relatively. 1 Besides, capital with 
its accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil 
that is the product of a long process of development. The 
productiveness of labour that serves as its foundation and 
starting point, is a gift, not of nature, but of a history embrac- 
ing thousands of centuries. 

Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the 
form of social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered 
by physical conditions. These are all referable to the constitution 
of man himself (race, &c), and to surrounding nature. The 
external physical conditions fall into two great economical 
classes, (1) Natural wealth in means of subsistence, i.e., a fruit- 
ful soil, waters teeming with fish, &c, and (2), natural wealth 
in the instruments of labour, such as waterfalls, navigable 
rivers, wood, metal, coal, &c. At the dawn of civilisation, it is 
the first class that turns the scale ; at a higher stage of de- 
velopment, it is the second. Compare, for example, England 
with India, or in ancient times, Athens and Corinth with the 
shores of the Black Sea. 

The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling 
for satisfaction, and the greater the natural fertility of the soil 
and the favourableness of the climate, so much less is the 
labour-time necessary for the maintenance and reproduction of 
the producer. So much greater therefore can be the excess of 
his labour for others over his labour for himself. Diodorus 
long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient Egyptians. 
u It is altogether incredible how little trouble and expense the 
bringing up of their children causes them. They cook for 
them the first simple food at hand ; they also give them the 
lower part of the papyrus stem to eat, so far as it can b 
roasted in the fire, and the roots and stalks of marsh plants, 

1 "Among tho wild Indians in America, almost everything is the labourer's, 99 
parts of a hundred arc to he put upon tho account of labour. In England, perhaps, 
Mil labourer has not j." (The Advantages of the East India Tradt, fco. p. 73.) 



522 Capitalist Production. 

some raw, some boiled and roasted. Most of the children 20 
without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild. Hence a 
child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the 
whole, than twenty drachmas. It is this, chiefly, which ex- 
plains why the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, there- 
fore, why so many great works can be undertaken." 1 Never- 
theless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to 
the extent of its population than to the large proportion of it 
that was freely disposable. Just as the individual labourer 
can do more surplus-labour in proportion as his necessary 
labour-time is less, so with regard to the working population. 
The smaller the part of it which is required for the production 
of the necessary means of subsistence, so much the greater is 
the part that can be set to do other work. 

Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circum- 
stances remaining the same, and given the length of the work- 
ing day, the quantity of surplus-labour will vary with the 
physical conditions of labour, especially with the fertility of 
the soil. But it by no means follows from this that the most 
fruitful soil is the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist 
mode of production. This mode is based on the dominion of 
man over nature. Where nature is too lavish, she " keeps him 
in hand, like a child in leading-strings." She does not impose 
upon him any necessity to develop himself. 2 It is not the 
tropics with their luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate 
zone, that is the mother country of capital. It is not the mere 
fertility of the soil, but the differentiation of the soil, the 
variety of its natural products, the changes of the seasons, 

1 Diodorus, 1. c. 1. I. c. 80. 

3 " The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so doth it make 
the people careless, proud, and given to all excesses ; whereas the second enforceth 
vigilancy, literature, arts and policy." (England's Treasure by Foreign Trade. Or 
the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure. Written by Thomas 
Muii of London, merchant, and now published for the common good by his son John 
Mun. London. 16G9, p. 181, 182.) "Nor can I conceive a greater curse upon a body 
of people, than to be thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for sub- 
sistence and food were, in great measure, spontaneous, and the climate required or 
admitted little care for raiment and covering . . . there may bo an extreme on the 
other side. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that pro- 
duces plentifully without any labour." (An Inquiry into the present High Price of 
I'ruvisionB. Lond. 1767. p. 10.) 



Absolute and Relative Surplus -Value. 523 

which form the physical basis for the social division of labour, 
and which, by changes in the natural surroundings, spur man 
on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his 
means and modes of labour. It is the necessity of bringing a 
natural force under the control of society, of economising, of 
appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of 
man's hand, that first plays the decisive part in the history of 
industry. Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, 1 Lom- 
bardy, Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by 
means of artificial cana's, not only supplies the soil with the 
water indispensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the 
shape of sediment from the hills, mineral fertilizers. The 
secret of the flourishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily 
under the dominion of the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. 2 
Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possi- 
bility, never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor, consequently, 
of surplus-value and a surplus-product. The result of differ- 
ence in the natural conditions of labour is this, that the same 
quantit} r of labour satisfies, in different countries, a different 
mass of requirements, 3 consequently, that under circumstances 

1 The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyptian as- 
tronomy, and with it the dominion of the priests, as directors of agriculture. " Le 
solstice est le moment de l'annee ou commence la crue du Nil, et celui que les 
Egyptiens ont dti observer avec le plus d'attention . . . C'6tait cette ann e tropique 
qu'il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger dans leurs operations agricoles. lis 
durcnt done chercher dans le ciel un signe apparent de son retour." (Cuvier : Dis- 
cours sur les revolutions du globe, ed. Hoefer. Paris, 18G3, p. 141.) 

2 One of the material bases of the power of the state over the small disconnected 
producing organisms in India, was the regulation of the water supply. The Mahome- 
tan rulers of India understood this better than their English successors. It is enough 
to recall to mind the famine of 18GG, which cost the lives of more than a million 
Hindoos in the district of Orissa, in the Bengal presidency. 

3 "There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the necessaries of 
life in equal plenty, and with the same quantity of labour. Men's wants increase or 
diminish with the severity or temperatencss of the climate they live in ; consequently, 
the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of different countries are obliged to 
carry on through necessity cannot be the same, nor is it practicable to ascertain the 
degree of variation farther than by the degrees of Heat and Cold ; from whence one 
in ay make ttiis general conclusion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain 
number of people is greatest in cold climatos, and least in hot ones ; for in the former 
men not only want more clothes, but tho earth moro cultivating than in the latti t 
(An Essay on the Governing Causes of tho Natural Itate of Interest. Lond. 17">0. p. 
GO.) The author of tbia epoch-makiue anonymous work is J. Massey. Hume took 
his theory of interest from it. 



524 Capitalist Prodtution. 

in other respects analogous, the necessary labour-time is differ- 
ent. These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural 
limits, i.e., by fixing the points at which labour for others can 
be< r in. In proportion as industry advances, these natural 
limits recede. In the midst of our West European society, 
where the labourer purchases the right to work for his Ovvn 
livelihood only by paying for it in surplus-labour, the idea 
easily takes root that it is an inherent quality of human labour 
to furnish a surplus-product. 1 But consider, for example, an 
inhabitant of the eastern islands of the Asiatic Archipelago, 
where sago grows wild in the forests. " When the inhabitants 
have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in the tree, that 
the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and divided into several 
pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and filtered : 
it is then quite fit for use as sago. One tree commonly yields 
*)001bs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. There, then, people 
go into the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with 
us they cut firewood." 2 Suppose now such an eastern bread- 
cutter requires 12 working hours a week for the satisfaction of 
all his wants. Nature's direct gift to him is plenty of leisure 
time. Before he can apply this leisure time productively for 
himself, a whole series of historical events is required ; before 
he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers, compulsion is 
necessary. If capitalist production were introduced, the honest 
fellow would perhaps have to work six days a week, in order 
to appropriate to himself the product of one working day- 
The bounty of Nature does not explain why he would then 
have to work 6 days a week, or why he must furnish 5 days 
of surplus-labour. It explains only why his necessary labour- 
time would be limited to one day a week. But in no case 
would his surplus-product arise from some occult quality 
inherent in human labour. 

Thus, not only does the historically developed social pro- 
ductiveness of labour, but also its natural productiveness, 
appear to be productiveness of the capital with which that 
labour is incorporated. 

1 " Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et devoirs du 
citoyen) laisser un excedant." Proudhon. 

" F. Sbouw : " Die Erde, die Pflanze und der Mensch, 2. Ed. Leipz. 1854, p. 148. 



Absolute and Relative Surplus -Value. 525 

Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus- 
value. He treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode 
of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of 
social production. Whenever he discusses the productiveness 
of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause of surplus-value, but 
the cause that determines the magnitude of that value. On 
the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed the produc- 
tiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read : 
Surplus-value). This at all events is a progress as against the 
mercantilists who, on their side, derived the excess of the price 
over the cost of production of the product, from the act of 
exchange, from the product being sold above its value. Never- 
theless, Ricardo's school simply shirked the problem, they did 
not solve it. In fact these bourgeois economists instinctively 
saw, and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply 
the burning question of the origin of surplus-value. But what 
are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half a century after 
Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the mercantilists, by 
clumsily repeating the wretched evasions of Ricardo's earliest 
vulgarisers ? 

Mill says : "The cause of profit is that labour produces more 
than is required for its support." So far, nothing but the old 
story ; but Mill wishing to add something of his own, pro- 
ceeds : " To vary the form of the theorem ; the reason why 
capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing, materials and 
tools, last longer than the time which was required to produce 
them." He here confounds the duration of labour-time with 
the duration of its products. According to this view, a baker 
whose product lasts only a day, could never extract from his 
workpeople the same profit, as a machine maker whose pro- 
ducts endure for 20 years and more. Of course it is very true, 
that if a bird's nest did not last longer than the time it takes 
in building, birds would have to do without nests. 

This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes 
his own superiority over the mercantilists. " We thus Bee," 
he proceeds, "that profit arises, not from the incident of ex- 
change, but from the productive power of labour ; and the 
general profit of the country is always what the productive 



c;2 6 Capitalist Production. 

puwer of labour makes it, whether any exchange takes place 
or not. If there were no division of employments, there would 
be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit." For 
Mill then, exchange, buying and selling, those general condi- 
tions of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there 
would always be profits even without the purchase and sale 
of labour-power ! 

14 If," he continues, " the labourers of the country collectively 
produce twenty per cent more than their wages, profits will be 
twenty per cent, whatever prices may or may not be." This 
is, on the one hand, a rare bit of tautology; for if labourers 
produce a surplus- value of 20% for the capitalist, his profit 
will be to the total wages of the labourers as 20 : 100. On 
the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that " profits will 
be 20%." They will always be less, because they are cal- 
culated upon the .sum total of the capital advanced. If, for 
example, the capitalist have advanced £500, of which £400 is 
laid out in means of production and £100 in wages, and if the 
rate of surplus- value be 20%, the rate of profit will be 20 : 500, 
i.e., 4% and not 20%. 

Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of hand- 
ling the different historical forms of social production. " I 
assume, throughout, the state of things which, where the 
labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few 
exceptions, universally ; namely, that the capitalist advances 
the whole expenses, including the entire remuneration of the 
labourer." Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state 
of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth. 
But let us finish — Mill is willing to concede, " that he should 
do so is not a matter of inherent necessity." On the con- 
trary : " the labourer might wait, until the production is com- 
plete, for all that part of his wages which exceeds mere neces- 
saries ; and even for the whole, if he has funds in hand 
sufficient for his temporary support. But in the latter case, 
the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, 
by supplying a portion of the funds necessary for carrying it 
on." Mill might have gone further and have added, that the 
labourer who advances to himself not only the necessaries of 



Changes of Magnitude. 527 

life but also the means of production, is in reality nothing but 
his own wage-labourer. He might also have said that the 
American peasant proprietor is but a serf who does enforced 
labour for himself instead of for his lord. 

After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production 
had no existence, still it would always exist, Mill is consistent 
enough to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even 
when it does exist. " And even in the former case " (when the 
workman is a wage labourer to whom the capitalist advances 
all the necessaries of life, he the labourer), " may be looked 
upon in the same light," (i.e., as a capitalist), " since, contribu- 
ting his labour at less than the market price, Q) he may be 
regarded as lending the difference (?) to his employer and 
receiving it back with interest, &c." 1 In reality, the labourer 
advances his labour gratuitously to the capitalist during, say 
one week, in order to receive the market price at the end of 
the week, &c, and it is this which, according to Mill, trans- 
forms him into a capitalist. On the level plain, simple mounds 
look like hills ; and the imbecile flatness of the present bour- 
geoisie is to be measured by the altitude of its great intellects. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



CHANGES OF MAGNITUDE IN THE PRICE OF LABOUR-POWER AND 

IN SURPLUS-VALUE 

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the 
necessaries of life habitually required by the average labourer. 
The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch 
of a given society, and can therefore be treated as a constant 
magnitude;. What changes, is the value of this quantity. 
There are, besides, two other factors that enter into the de- 
termination of the value of labour-power. One, the expenses 

J. St. Mill. Principle* of Pol. Econ. Lond. 18GH, p. 252 53 passim. 



q; 28 Capitalist Production. 

of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode 
of production ; the other, its natural diversity, the difference 
between the labour-power of men and women, of children and 
adults. The employment of these different sorts of labour- 
power, an employment which is, in its turn, made necessary by 
the mode of production, makes a great difference in the cost of 
maintaining the family of the labourer, and in the value of the 
labour-power of the adult male. Both these factors, however, 
are excluded in the following investigation. 1 

I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value ; (2) 
that the price of labour-power rises occasionally above its 
value, but never sinks below it. 

On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes 
of surplus- value and of price of labour-power are determined 
by three circumstances ; (1) the length of the working day, or 
the extensive magnitude of labour ; (2) the normal intensity of 
labour, its intensive magnitude, whereby a given quantity of 
labour is expended in a given time ; (3) the productiveness of 
labour, whereby the same quantum of labour yields, in a given 
time, a greater or less quantum of product, dependent on the 
degree of development in the conditions of production. Very 
different combinations are clearly possible, according as one of 
the three factors is constant and two variable, or two constant 
and one variable, or lastly, all three simultaneously variable. 
And the number of these combinations is augmented by the 
fact that, when these factors simultaneously vary, the amount 
and direction of their respective variations may differ. In 
what follows the chief combinations alone are considered. 

1. Length of the working day and intensity of labour constant. 
Productiveness of labour variable. 

On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the 
magnitude of surplus-value, are determined by three laws. 

(1). A working day of given length always creates the same 
amount of value, no matter how the productiveness of labour, 

1 The case considered at pages 305-308 is here of course omitted. (Note by editor 
of third edition.) 



Changes of Magnitude. 529 

and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each 
single commodity produced, may vary. 

If the value created by a working day of 12 hours be, say, 
six shillings, then, although the mass of the articles produced 
varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that 
the value represented by six shillings is spread over a greater 
or less number of articles. 

(2.) Surplus-value and the value of labour-power vary in 
opposite directions. A variation in the productiveness of 
labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the 
opposite direction in the value of labour-power, and in the 
same direction in surplus-value. 

The value created by a working day of 12 hours is a constant 
quantity, say, six shillings. This constant quantity is the sum 
of the surplus-value plus the value of the labour-power, which 
latter value the labourer replaces by an equivalent. It is 
self-evident, that if a constant quantity consist of two parts, 
neither of them can increase without the other diminishing. 
Let the two parts at starting be equal ; 3 shillings value of 
labour-power, 3 shillings surplus- value. Then the value of 
the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four, with- 
out the surplus-value falling from three shillings to two ; and 
the surplus- value cannot rise from three shillings to four, 
without the value of labour-power falling from three shillings 
to two. Under these circumstances, therefore, no change can 
take place in the absolute magnitude, either of the surplus- 
value, or of the value of labour-power, without a simultaneous 
change in their relative magnitudes, i.e., relatively to each 
other. It is impossible for them to rise or fall simultaneously. 

Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and con- 
sequently surplus-value cannot rise, without a rise in the pro- 
ductiveness of labour. For instance, in the above case, the 
value of the labour-power cannot sink from three shillings 
to two, unless an increase in the productiveness of labour 
makes it possible to produce in 4 hours the same quantity of 
necessaries as previously required G hours to produce. On 
the other hand, the value of the labour-power cannot rise 

from three shillings to four, without a decrease In the pro- 

2 L 



530 Capitalist Production. 

ductiveness of labour, whereby eight hours become requisite 
to produce the same quantity of necessaries, for the production 
of which six hours previously sufficed. It follows from this,. 
that an increase in the productiveness of labour causes a fall 
in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise in surplus- 
value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such productive- 
ness causes a rise in the value of labour-power, and a fall in 
surplus- value. 

In formulating this law,Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; 
although a change in the magnitude of the surplus- value or 
surplus-labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the 
magnitude of the value of labour-power, or in the quantity of 
necessary labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the 
same proportion. They do increase or diminish by the same 
quantity. But their proportional increase or diminution de- 
pends on their original magnitudes before the change in the 
productiveness of labour took place. If the value of the labour- 
power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour-time 8 hours, and 
the surplus- value be 2 shillings, or the surplus-labour 4 hours, 
and if, in consequence of an increase in the productiveness of 
labour, the value of the labour-power fall to 3 shillings, or the 
necessary labour to 6 hours, the surplus-value will rise to 3 
shillings, or the surplus-labour to 6 hours. The same quantity, 
1 shilling or 2 hours, is added in one case and subtracted in 
the other. But the proportional change of magnitude is- 
different in each case. While the value of the labour-power 
falls from 4 shillings to 3, i.e., by \ or 25%, the surplus-value 
rises from 2 shillings to 3, i.e., by \ or 50%. It therefore 
follows that the proportional increase or diminution in surplus- 
value, consequent on a given change in the productiveness of 
labour, depends on the original magnitude of that portion of 
the working day which embodies itself in surplus-value ; the 
smaller that portion, the greater is the proportional change ; 
the greater that portion, the less is the proportional change. 

(3.) Increase or diminution in surplus-value is always conse- 
quent on, and never the cause of, the corresponding diminution 
or increase in the value of labour-power. 1 

1 To this third law MacCulloch has made, amongst others, this absurd addition,. 



Changes of Magnitude. 531 

Since the working-day is constant in magnitude, and is 
represented by a value of constant magnitude, since, to every 
variation in the magnitude of surplus-value, there corresponds 
an inverse variation in the value of labour-power, and since 
the value of labour-power cannot change, except in consequence 
of a change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, 
under these conditions, that every change of magnitude in 
surplus-value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the 
value of labour-power. If, then, as we have already seen, there 
can be no change of absolute magnitude in the value of labour- 
power, and in surplus- value, unaccompanied by a change in 
their relative magnitudes, so now it follows that no change in 
their relative magnitudes is possible, without a previous change 
in the absolute magnitude of the value of labour-power. 

According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of 
surplus- value, presupposes a movement in the value of labour- 
power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the 
productiveness of labour. The limit of this change is given by 
the altered value of labour-power. Nevertheless, even when 
circumstances allow the law to operate, subsidiary movements 
may occur. For example : if in consequence of the increased 
productiveness of labour, the value of labour- power fall from 4 
shillings to 3, or the necessary labour-time from 8 hours to G, 
the price of labour-power may possibly not fall below 3s. 8d., 
3s. Gd., or 3s. 2d., and the surplus-value consequently not rise 
above 3s. 4d., 3s. Gd., or 3s. lOd. The amount of this fall, the 
lowest limit of which is 3 shillings (the new value of labour- 
power), depends on the relative weight, which the pressure of 
capital on the one side, and the resistance of the labourer on 
the other, throws into the scale. 

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a 

that a rise in surplus-value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value of labour-power, 
can occur through the abolition of taxes payable by the capitalist. The abolition of 
such taxes makes no change whatever in tin: piantity of surplus-value that the capi 
talist extorts at first-hand from the labourer. It alien ->nl\ the proportion in which 
that surplus-value is divided between himself Mid third prisons. It consequently 
makes no alteration whatever in the relation between surplus-value md value of 

labour-power. BCaoOullooh'i exception therefore proves only his misapprehi otion of 

the rale, a misfortune that as oftens happen! to bun in the vulgarisation of Etioardo, 

as it does to J. IS. Say in the vulgarisation of A. lam Smith. 



5 ]2 Capitalist Production. 

given quantity of necessaries. It is the value and not the 
mass of these necessaries that varies with the productiveness 
of labour. It is, however, possible that, owing to an increase 
of productiveness, both the labourer and the capitalist may 
simultaneously be able to appropriate a greater quantity of 
these necessaries, without any change in the price of labour- 
power or in surplus-value. If the value of labour-power be 3 
shillings, and the necessary labour-time amount to 6 hours, if 
the surplus-value likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus- 
labour 6 hours, then if the productiveness of labour were 
doubled without altering the ratio of necessary labour to 
surplus-labour, there would be no change of magnitude in 
surplus- value and price of labour-power. The only result 
would be that each of them would icpresent twice as many 
use-values as before ; these use-values being twice as cheap as 
before. Although labour-power would be unchanged in price, 
it would be above its value. If, however, the price of labour- 
power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible point con- 
sistent with its new value, but to 2s. lOd. or 2s. 6d., still this 
lower price would represent an increased mass of necessaries. 
In this way it is possible with an increasing productiveness of 
labour, for the price of labour-power to keep on falling, and 
yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in the 
mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. But even in such 
case, the fall in the value of labour-power would cause a corre- 
sponding rise of surplus-value, and thus the abyss between the 
labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep 
widening. 1 

Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three 
laws we have above stated. But he falls into the following 
errors : (1) he looks upon the special conditions under which 
these laws hold good as the general and sole conditions of 
capitalist production. He knows no change, either in the 
length of the working day, or in the intensity of labour ; con- 

1 "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and that 
either more or less is produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, the propor- 
tion of wages may obviously vary, whilst the quantity, which that proportion repre- 
sents, remains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst the proportion remains 
the same." (" Outlines of Political Economy,'' <fec, p. 67.) 



Changes of Magnitude. 533 

sequently with him there can be only one variable factor, viz., 
the productiveness of labour ; (2), and this errors vitiates his 
analysis much more than (1), he has not, any more than have 
the other economists, investigated surplus-value as such, i.e., in- 
dependently of its particular forms, such as profit, rent, &c. He 
therefore confounds together the laws of the rate of surplus- 
value and the laws of the rate of profit. The rate of profit is, 
as we have already said, the ratio of the surplus-value to the 
total capital advanced ; the rate of surplus- value is the ratio 
of the surplus- value to the variable part of that capital. 
Assume that a capital C of £500 is made up of raw materia], 
instruments of labour, &c. (c) to the amount of £400 ; and of 
wages (v) to the amount of £100; and further, that the surplus- 
value (s) = £100. Then we have rate of surplus- value * = 
JUL = 100%. But the rate of profit -£ =-*£ = 20%. It is, 
besides, obvious that the rate of profit may depend on circum- 
stances that in no way affect the rate of surplus-value. I 
shall show in Book III. that, with a given rate of surplus- 
value, we may have any number of rates of profit, and that various 
rates of surplus-value may, under given conditions, express 
themselves in a single rate of profit. 

II. Working-day constant. Productiveness of labour constant. 
Intensity of labour variable. 

Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure 
of labour in a given time. Hence a working-day of more 
intense labour is embodied in more products than is one of less 
intense labour, the length of each day being the same. In- 
creased productiveness of labour also, it is true, will supply 
more products in a given working-day. But In this latter case, 
the value of each single product falls, for it costs less labour 
than before j in the former case, that value remains unchanged, 
for each article costs the same labour as before. Here we have 
an increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a 
fall in their individual prices: as their number increases, so 
does the sum of their prices. But in the case of increased 



534 Capitalist Production. 

productiveness, a given value is spread over a greater mass of 
products. Hence the length of the working-day being con- 
stant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be incorporated 
in an increased value, and, the value of money remaining un- 
changed, in more money. The value created varies with the 
extent to which the intensity of labour deviates from its 
normal intensity in the society. A given working-day, there- 
fore, no longer creates a constant, but a variable value ; in a 
day of 12 hours of ordinary intensity, the value created is, say 
u' shillings, but with increased intensity, the value created may 
be 7, 8, or more shillings. It is clear that, if the value created 
by a day's labour increases from, say, 6 to 8 shillings, then the 
two parts into which this value is divided, viz., price of labour- 
power and surplus-value, may both of them increase simul- 
taneously, and either equally or unequally. They may both 
simultaneously increase from 3 shillings to 4. Here, the rise 
in the price of labour-power does not necessarily imply that 
the price has risen above the value of labour-power. On the 
contrary, the rise in price may be accompanied by a fall in 
value. This occurs whenever the rise in the price of labour- 
power does not compensate for its increased wear and tear. 

We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the 
productiveness of labour does not cause any change in the 
value of labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of 
surplus-value, unless the products of the industries affected are 
articles habitually consumed by the labourers. In the present 
case this condition no longer applies. For when the variation 
is either in the duration or in the intensity of labour, there is 
always a corresponding change in the magnitude of the value 
created, independently of the nature of the article in which 
that value is embodied. 

If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously 
and equally in every branch of industry, then the new and 
higher degree of intensity would become the normal degree for 
the society, and would therefore cease to be taken account of. 
But still, even then, the intensity of labour would be different 
in different countries, and would modify the international 
application of the law of value The more intense working- 



Changes of Magnitude. 535 

day of one nation would be represented by a greater sum of 
money than would the less intense day of another nation. 1 

III. Productiveness and Intensity of Labour constant Length 
of the working -day variable. 

The working-day may vary in two ways. It may be made 
either longer or shorter. From our present data, and within 
the limits of the assumptions made on p. 528 we obtain the 
following laws : 

(1.) The working-day creates a greater or less amount of 
value in proportion to its length — thus, a variable and not a 
constant quantity of value. 

(2.) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes 
of surplus value and of the value of labour-power arises from 
a change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus-labour, and 
consequently of the surplus- value. 

(3.) The absolute value of labour-power can change only in 
consequence of the reaction exercised by the prolongation of 
surplus-labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. Every 
change in this absolute value is therefore the effect, but never 
the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus- value. 

We begin with the case in which the working-day is 
shortened. 

(1.) A shortening of the working-day under the conditions 
given above, leaves the value o° labour-power, and with it, the 
necessary labour-time, unaltered. It reduces the surplus- 
labour and surplus-value. Along with the absolute magnitude 
of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i.e., its magnitude 
relatively to the value of labour-power whose magnitude re- 
mains unaltered. Only by lowering the price of labour-power 
below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless. 

1 "All things being equal, the Engliih manufacturer can turn out a considerably 
larger iimount of work in • given time than ;i foreign manufacturer, so much 
counterbalance the difference of the irorking-dayi, between <>o houna ireekher6| 
and 72 or80 'I ewhere." (Bep. of [nip. of Pact, fox Slit Oct. 1866, p. 86.1 Tb* 
most Infallible meani for reducing this qualitative difference between the Engliih 
and Continental working hour would bet law ihortening quantitatively thel< 
•of the working-day in Continental fa toriei. 



536 Capitalist Production. 

AW the usual arguments against the shortening of the 
working-day, assume that it takes place under the conditions 
we have here supposed to exist ; but in reality the very con- 
trary is the case : a change in the productiveness and intensity 
of labour either precedes, or immediately follows, a shortening 
of the working-day. 1 

(2.) Lengthening of the working-day. Let the necessary 
labour- time be G hours, or the value of labour-power 3 shillings; 
also let the surplus-labour be 6 hours or the surplus-value & 
shillings. The whole working-day then amounts to 12 hours 
and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings. If, now, the working- 
day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of labour-power 
remain unaltered, the surplus- value increases both absolutely 
and relatively. Although there is no absolute change in the 
value of labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. Under the 
conditions assumed in I. there could not be a change of relative 
magnitude in the value of labour-power without a change in 
its absolute magnitude. Here, on the contraiy, the change of 
relative magnitude in the value of labour-power is the result of 
the change of absolute magnitude in surplus- value. 

Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases 
with the length of that day, it is evident that the surplus- 
value and the price of labour-power may simultaneously in- 
crease, either by equal or unequal quantities. This simul- 
taneous increase is therefore possible in two cases, one, the 
actual lengthening of the working-day, the other, an increase 
in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such lengthening. 

When the working-day is prolonged, the price of labour- 
power may fall below its value, although that price be nomin- 
ally unchanged or even rise. The value of a day's labour- 
power, is, as will be remembered, estimated from its normal 
average duration, or from the normal duration of life among 
the labourers, and from corresponding normal transformations 
of organised bodily matter into motion, 2 in conformity with the 

1 "There are compensating circumstances .... which the working of the Ten 
Hours' Act has brought to light." (Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 1st Dec. 1848, p. 7.) 

2 " The amount of labour which a man had undergone in the course of 24 hours 
might be approximately arrived at by an examination of the chymical changes which 
had taken place in his body, changed forms in matter indicating the anterior exercise- 
»>f dynamic force." (Grove : "On the Correlation of Physical Forces.") 






Changes of Magnitude. 537 

nature of man. Up to a certain point, the increased wear and 
tear of labour-power, inseparable from a lengthened working- 
day, may be compensated by higher wages. But beyond this 
point the wear and tear increases in geometrical progression, 
and every condition suitable for the normal reproduction and 
functioning of labour-power is suppressed. The price of 
labour-power and the degree of its exploitation cease to be 
commensurable quantities. 

IV. — Simultaneous variations in the duration, productiveness, 

and intensity of labour. 

It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here 
possible. Any two of the factors may vary and the third 
remain constant, or all three may vary at once. They may 
vary either in the same or in different degrees, in the same or in 
opposite directions, with the result that the variations counter- 
act one another, either wholly or in part. Nevertheless the 
analysis of every possible case is easy in view of the results 
given in I., II., and III. The effect of every possible combin- 
ation may be found by treating each factor in turn as variable, 
and the other two constant for the time being. We shall, 
therefore, notice, and that briefly, but two important cases. 

(1). Diminishing productiveness of labour with a simultaneous 
lengthening of the working-day. 

In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here 
refer to diminution in those industries whose products deter- 
mine the value of labour-power ; such a diminution, for 
example, as results from decreasing fertility of the soil, and 
from thf corresponding clearness of its products. Take the 
working-day at 12 hours and the value created by it at G 
shillings, of which one half replaces the value of the labour- 
power, the other forms the surplus-value. Suppose, in conse- 
quence of the increased clearness of the products of the Boil, 
that th.- value of labour-power rises from 3 shillings t<» l, and 
therefore the necessary labour-time from <> hums to & If tl. 



5^8 Capitalist Production. 

be no change in the length of the working-day, the surplus- 
labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus-value from 3 
shillings to 2. If the day be lengthened by 2 hours, i.e., from 
12 hours to 14, the surplus-labour remains at 6 hours, the 
surplus-value at 6 shillings, but the surplus-value decreases 
compared with the value of labour-power, as measured by 
the necessary labour-time. If the day be lengthened by 4 
hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional magnitudes 
of surplus-value and value of labour-power, of surplus-labour 
and necessary labour, continue unchanged, but the absolute 
magnitude of surplus-value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of 
the surplus-labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33 J%. 
Therefore, with diminishing productiveness of labour and a 
simultaneous lengthening of the working-day, the absolute 
magnitude of surplus-value may continue unaltered, at the 
same time that its relative magnitude diminishes ; its relative 
magnitude may continue unchanged, at the same time that its 
absolute magnitude increases ; and, provided the lengthening 
of the day be sufficient, both may increase. 

In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of 
provisions led in England to a nominal rise in wages, although 
the real wages, expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. From 
this fact West and Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the 
diminution in the productiveness of agricultural labour had 
brought about a fall in the rate of surplus-value, and they 
made this assumption of a fact that existed only in their 
imaginations, the starting-point of important investigations 
into the relative magnitudes of wages, profits, and rent. But, 
as a matter of fact, surplus- value had at that time, thanks to 
the increased intensity of labour, and to the prolongation of the 
working-day, increased both in absolute and relative magnitude. 
This was the period in which the right to prolong the hours of 
labour to an outrageous extent was established f the period 

1 "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast ; but there is an obvious limit, be- 
yond which they cannot be separated. With regard to the unusual exertions made 
by the labouring classes in periods of dearness, which produce the fall of wages noticed 
in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry, 1814-15), 
" they are most meritorious in the individuals, and certainly favour the growth of 
capital. Hut no man of humanity could wish to see them constant and unremitted. 



Changes of Magnitude. 539 

that was especially characterised by an accelerated accumula- 
tion of capital here, by pauperism there. 1 

(2) Increasing intensity and productiveness of labour with 
simultaneous shortening of the working-day. 

Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, 
both have a like effect. They both augment the mass of 
articles produced in a given time. Both, therefore, shorten that 
portion of the working-day which the labourer needs to produce 
his means of subsistence or their equivalent. The minimum 
length of the working-day is fixed by this necessary but contrac- 
tile portion of it. If the whole working-day were to shrink to the 
length of this portion, surplus-labour would vanish, a consum- 
mation utterly impossible under the regime of capital. Only 
by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the 
length of the working-day be reduced to the necessary labour- 
time. But, even in that case, the latter would extend its 
limits. On the one hand, because the notion of " means of 
subsistence" would considerably expand, and the labourer 

They are most admirable as a temporary relief ; but if they were constantly in action, 
effects of a similar kind would result from them, as from the population of a country 
being pushed to the very extreme limits of its food." (Malthus : " Inquiry into the 
Nature and Progress of Rent," Lond., 1815., p. 48, note.) All honour to Malthus 
that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to which he else- 
nrhere in his pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and others, in face of the most 
notorious facts, make invariability in the length of the working-day the ground-work 
•of all their investigations. But the conservative interests, which Malthus served, pre- 
vented him from seeing that an unlimited prolongation of the working-day, combined 
with an extraordinary development of machinery, and the exploitation of women and 
children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working class "super" 
nuinetary," particularly whenever the war should have ceased, and the monopoly of 
England in the markets of the world should have come to an end. It was, of course, 
far more convenient, and much more in conformity with the interests of the ruling 
classes, whom Malthus adored like a true priest, to explain this "over-population" 

by the eternal laws of Nature, rather than by the historical laws of capitalist 
production. 

1 "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded from the 

greater ezi i ti<>ns, and perhaps the greater privations of the laboui ing classes, the most 

numerous in every society. More women and children were compelled by necessitous 

circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations , and former workmen were, from 
the same cause, obliged to devote ■ greater portion of t heir time to increase produc* 
tion." (Essays on PoL Boon., in which are illustrated the principal causes of the 

present national distress, Loud., L8S0, \>. 248.) 



540 Capitalist Production. 

would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life. 
On the other hand, because a part of what is now surplus- 
labour, would then count as necessary labour ; I mean the 
labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation. 

The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more 
can the working-day be shortened ; and the more the working- 
day is shortened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. 
From a social point of view, the productiveness increases in 
the same ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, 
includes not only economy of the means of production, but also 
the avoidance of all useless labour. The capitalist mode of 
production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy in each 
individual business, on the other hand, begets, by its anarchical 
system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of 
labour-power and of the social means ot production, not to 
mention the creation of a vast number of employments, at 
present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous. 

The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the 
time which society is bound to devote to material production 
is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for 
the free development, intellectual and social, of the in- 
dividual is greater, in proportion as the work is more and more 
evenly divided among all the able-bodied members of society, 
and as a particular class is more and more deprived of the 
power to shift the natural burden of la.bour from its own 
shoulders to those of another layer of society. In this direc- 
tion, the shortening of the working-day finds at last a limit in 
the generalisation of labour. In capitalist society spare time 
is acquired for one class by converting the whole life- time of 
the masses into labour-time. 



Various Formula for Rate of Stirplus- Value. 541 
CHAPTER XVIII. 

VARIOUS FORMULA FOR THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE. 

We have seen that the rate of surplus-value is represented by 
the following formulae. 

Surplus-value / j \ Surplus- value Surplus-lab our 

Variable Capital \ v ) Value of labour-power Necessary labour 

The two first of these formulae represent, as a ratio of values, 
that which, in the third, is represented as a ratio of the times 
during which those values are produced. These formulae, 
supplementary the one to the other, are rigorously definite and 
correct. We therefore find them substantially, but not con- 
sciously, worked out in classical political economy. There 
we meet with the following derivative formulae. 

tt Surplus-labour _ Surplus-value Surplus-product 

Working-day " Value of the Product " Total Product 

One and the same ratio is here expressed as a ratio of 
labour-times, of the values in which those labour-times are 
embodied, and of the products in which those values exist. It 
is of course understood that, by " Value of the Product," is 
meant only the value newly created in a working-day, the 
constant part of the value of the product being excluded. 

In all of these formulae (II.), the actual degree of exploita- 
tion of labour, or the rate of surplus-value, is falsely expressed. 
Let the working-day be 12 hours. Then, making the same 
assumptions as in former instances, the real degree of ex- 
ploitation of labour will be represented in the following pro- 
portions. 

6 hours surplus-labour Surplus-value of 3 sh. \ (\(\°/ 

V) hours necessary labour Variable Capital of 3 sh. "" /o 

From formulae II. we get very differently, 

8 hours surplus-labour Sui plus-value of 3 sh. _ K(\°/ 

Working-day of 12 hours " Value ereated of 6 ah. '° 

These derivative formulae express, in reality, only the pro- 
portion in which the working-day, or the value produced by 



542 Capitalist Production. 

it, is divided between capitalist and labourer. If they are to 
be treated as direct expressions of the degree of self-expansion 
of capital, the following erroneous law would hold good : Sur- 
plus-labour or surplus- value can never reach lOO^. 1 Since 
the surplus-labour is only an aliquot part of the working-day, 
or since surplus-value is only an aliquot part of the value 
created, the surplus-labour must necessarily be always less 
than the working-day, or the surplus-value always less than 
the total value created. In order, however, to attain the 
ratio of 100 : 100 they must be equal. In order that the 
surplus-labour may absorb the whole day (i.e., an average day 
of any week or year), the necessary labour must sink to zero. 
But if the necessary labour vanish, so too does the surplus- 
labour, since it is only a function of the former. The ratio 
surpius-iabour or Surplus value can therefore never reach the limit of 

\\ orking-day Value created 

~, still less rise to ™~-* But not so the rate of surplus- 
value, the real degree of exploitation of labour. Take, e.g., the 
estimate of L. de Lavergne, according to which the English 
agricultural labourer gets only J, the capitalist (farmer) on the 
other hand § of the product 2 or of its value, apart from the 
question of how the booty is subsequently divided between the 

1 Thus, e.g., in " Dritter Brief an v. Kirchmann von Kodbertus. Widerlegung der 
Kicardo'schen Theorie von der Grundrente und Begriindung einer neuen Benten- 
theorie. Berlin, 1851." I shall return to this letter later on ; in spite of its 
erroneous theory of rent, it sees through the nature of capitalist production. 

Note by the Editor of the 3rd Edition. It may be seen from this how favourably 
Marx judged his predecessors, whenever he found in them real progress, or new and 
sound ideas. The subsequent publication of Rodbertus' letters to Kud. Meyer has 
shown that the above acknowledgment by Marx wants restricting to some extent. 
In those letters this passage occurs : "Capital must be rescued not only from labour, 
but from itself, and that will be best effected, by treating the acts of the industrial 
capitalist as economical and political functions, that have been delegated to him 
with his capital, and by treating his profit as a form of salary, because we still know 
no other social organisation. But salaries may be regulated, and may alsobcreduced 
if they take too much from wages. The irruption of Marx into Society, as I may call 
his book, must be warded off. . . . Altogether, Marx's book is not so much an in- 
vestigation into capital, as a polemic against the present form of capital, a form 
which he confounds with the concept itself of capital." (Brief e, &c. , von Dr. Bodbertus- 
Jagetzow, herausgg. von Dr. Bud. Meyer, Berlin, 1881, I. Bd. p. 111., 48. Brief von 
Rodbertus.). To such ideological commonplaces did the bold attack by Bodbertus in 
his " social letters " finally dwindle down. 

2 That part of the product which merely replaces the constant capital advanced, is 
of course left out in this calculation. Mr L. de Lavergne, a blind admirer of Eng- 
land, is inclined to estimate the share of the capitalist too low, rather than too high. 



Various Formula for Rate of Surplus- Value. 543 

capitalist, the landlord and others. According to this, the sur- 
plus-labour of the English agricultural labourer is to his 
necessary labour as 3 : 1, which gives a rate of exploitation of 
300%. 

The favourite method of treating the working-day as con- 
stant in magnitude became, through the use of the formulae 
II., a fixed usage, because in them surplus-labour is always 
compared with a working-day of given length. The same 
holds good when the repartition of the value produced is ex- 
clusively kept in sight. The working-day that has already 
been realised in a given value, must necessarily be a day of 
given length. 

The habit of representing surplus-value and value of labour- 
power as fractions of the value created — a habit that originates 
in the capitalist mode of production itself, and whose import 
will hereafter be disclosed — conceals the very transaction that 
characterises capital, namely the exchange of variable capital 
for living labour-power, and the consequent exclusion of the 
labourer from the product. Instead of the real fact, we have 
the false semblance of an association, in which labourer and 
capitalist divide the product in proportion to the different ele- 
ments which they respectively contribute towards its for- 
mation. 1 

Moreover, the formulae II. can at any time be reconverted 
into formulie I. If, for instance, we have S££^1iS iS tben 
the necessary labour-time being 12 hours less the surplus- 
labour of 6 hours, we get the following result, 

Sur plus-labour of hours 100 

Necessary labour of G hours - 100 

There is a third formula which I have occasionally already 
anticipated ; it is 

ttt Surplus-value Surplus-labour Unpaid labour 

Value of labour-power Necessary labour Paid labour 

1 All well-developed forms of capitalist production being forms of co-operation, 
nothing is, of course, easier, than to make abstraction from their antagonistic 
character, and to transform them by a word into some form of free association, at il 
done by A. de Laborde in "Do l'lvsprit de l'Association dans tons Let intents Ac la 
communautc." Paiis 1 S 1 8. H. Carey, the Yankee, occasionally performs this con- 
juring trick with like success, even with the relations resulting from slavery. 



544 Capitalist Production. 

After the investigations we have given above, it is no longer 
possible to be misled, by the formula p g^ d ^ r , into con- 
cluding, that the capitalist pays for labour and not for labour- 
power. This formula is only a popular expression for 
to'r' rSr- ^he capitalist pays the value, so far as price co- 
incides with value, of the labour-power, and receives in ex- 
change the disposal of the living labour-power itself. His 
usufruct is spread over two periods. During one the labourer 
produces a value that is only equal to the value of his labour- 
power : he produces its equivalent. Thus the capitalist re- 
ceives in return for his advance of the price of the labour- 
power, a product of the same price. It is the same as if he 
had bought the product ready made in the market. During 
the other period, the period of surplus-labour, the usufruct of 
the labour-power creates a value for the capitalist, that costs 
him no equivalent. 1 This expenditure of labour-power 
comes to him gratis. In this sense it is that surplus-labour 
can be called unpaid labour. 

Capital, therefore, is not only, as Adam Smith says, the com- 
mand over labour. It is essentially the command over unpaid 
labour. All surplus-value, whatever particular form (profit, 
interest, or rent), it may subsequently crystallise into, is in sub- 
stance the materialisation of unpaid labour. The secret of the 
self-expansion of capital resolves itself into having the disposal 
of a definite quantity of other people's unpaid labour. 

1 Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of surplus -value, yet 
this much was clear to them, viz., that it is " une richesse independante et disponible 
/m'il (the possessor) n'a point achetee et qu'il vend." (Turgot : " Reflexions sur la 
Formation et la Distribution des Richesses," p. 11.) 



PART VI. 
WAGES. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUE (AND RESPECTIVELY THE 
PRICE) OF LABOUR-POWER INTO WAGES. 

ON the surface of bourgeois society the wage of the labourer 
appears as the price of labour, a certain quantity of money 
that is paid for a certain quantity of labour. Thus people 
speak of the value of labour and call its expression in money 
its necessary or natural price. On the other hand they speak 
of the market prices of labour, i.e., prices oscillating above or 
below its natural price. 

But what is the value of a commodity ? The objective form 
of the social labour expended in its production. And how do 
we measure the quantity of this value ? By the quantity of 
the labour contained in it. How then is the value, e.g., of a 12 
hours' working day to be determined ? By the 12 working 
hours contained in a working day of 12 hours, which is an 
absurd tautology. 1 

In order to be sold as a commodity in the market, labour 

1 "Mr. lticardo, ingeniously enough, avoids a difficulty which, on a first view, 
threatens to encumher his doctrine, that value depends on the quantity of labour em- 
ployed in production. If this principle is rigidly adhered to, it follows that the value 
of labour depends on the quantity of labour employed in producing it — which is 
evidently absurd. ]iy a dexterous turn, therefore, Mr. Ricardo makes the value of 
labour depend on the quantity of labour required to produce wages ; or, to give him 
tin benefit of his own language, he maintains, that the value of labour is to be 
estimated by the quantity of labour required to produce wages ; by which he means 
the quantity of labour required to produce the money or commodities given to the 
labourer. This is similar to saying, that the value of cloth is estimated, not by the 
quantity of labour bestowed on its production, but by the quantity of labour boitowod 
on the production Of the silver, for winch the cloth is exchanged." (A Critical Dis- 
course on the Nature, &c, of Value, p. 60, 5]») 



546 Capitalist Production. 

must at all events exist before it is sold. But could the 
labourer give it an independent objective existence, he would 
sell a commodity and not labour. 1 

Apart from these contradictions, a direct exchange of money, 
i.e., of realized labour, with living labour would either do away 
with the law of value which only begins to develop itself freely 
on the basis of capitalist production, or do away with capitalist 
production itself, which rests directly on wage-labour. The 
working day of 12 hours embodies itself, e.g., in a money value 
of 6s. Either equivalents are exchanged, and then the labourer 
receives 6s. for 12 hours' labour ; the price of his labour would 
be equal to the price of his product. In this case he produces 
no surplus-value for the buyer of his labour, the 6s. are not 
transformed into capital, the basis of capitalist production 
vanishes. But it is on this very basis that he sells his labour 
and that his labour is wage-labour. Or else he receives for 12 
hours' labour less than 6s., i.e., less than 12 hours' labour. 
Twelve hours' labour are exchanged against 10, 6, &c, hours' 
labour. This equalisation of unequal quantities not merely 
does away with the determination of value. Such a self-de- 
structive contradiction cannot be in any way even enunciated 
or formulated as a Jaw. 2 

It is of no avail to deduce the exchange of more labour 
against less, from their difference of form, the one being 
realized, the other living. 3 This is the more absurd as the 

1 " If you call labour a commodity, it is not like a commodity which is first pro- 
duced in order to exchange, and then brought to market where it must exchange with 
other commodities according to the respective quantities of each which there may be 
in the market at the time ; labour is created the moment it is brought to market ; 
nay, it is brought to market before it is created." (Observations on some Verbal 
Disputes, etc., pp. 75, 76.) 

2 "Treating labour as a commodity, and capital, the produce of labour, as another, 
then, if the values of these two commodities were regulated by equal quantities of 
labour, a given amount of labour would . . . exchange for that quantity of capital 
which had been produced by the same amount of labour ; antecedent labour would 

. . . exchange for the same amount as present labour. But the value of labour in 
relation to other commodities ... is determined not by equal quantities of labour." 
(E. G. Wakefield in his edition of Adam Smith's " Wealth of Nations," vol. i., London, 
1836, p. 231, note.) 

3 " II a fallu convenir (a new edition of the contrat social !) que toutes les fois qu'il 
echangerait du travail fait contre du travail a faire, le dernier (le capitaliste) aurait 
une valeur supcrieure au premier" (le travailleur). Simonde (i.e., Sismondi), "De 
la Kichesse Commemale," Geneve, 1803, t. 1, p. 37. 



Value of Labour-Power and Wages. 547 

value of a commodity is determined not by the quantity of 
labour actually realized in it, but by the quantity of living 
labour necessary for its production. A commodity represents, 
say 6 working hours. If an invention is made by which it can be 
produced in 3 hours, the value, even of the commodity already 
produced, falls by half. It represents now 3 hours of social 
labour instead of the 6 formerly necessary. It is the quantity 
of labour required for its production, not the realized form of 
that labour, by which the amount of the value of a commodity 
is determined. 

That which comes directly face to face with the possessor of 
money on the market, is in fact not labour, but the labourer. 
What the latter sells is his labour-power. As soon as his 
labour actually begins, it has alreadv ceased to belong to him ; 
it can therefore no longer be sold by him. Labour is the sub- 
stance, and the immanent measure of value, but has itself no 
value. 1 

In the expression " value of labour," the idea of value is not 
only completely obliterated, but actually reversed. It is an 
expression as imaginary as the value of the earth. These 
imaginary expressions, arise, however, from the relations of pro- 
duction themselves. They are categories for the phenomenal 
forms of essential relations. That in their appearance things 
often represent themselves in inverted form is pretty well 
known in every science except political economy. 2 

1 " Labour the exclusive standard of value . . . the creator of all wealth, no com- 
modity." Th. Hodgskin, 1. c. p. 18G. 

2 On the other hand, the attempt to explain such expressions as merely poetic 
license only shows the impotence of the analysis. Herce, in answer to Proudhon's 
phrase ; " Le travail est dit valoir, non pas en taut que marchandise lui meme, mail 
en vue dcs valeurs qu'on suppose renfermecs puissanciellement en lui. La valour <lu 
travail est une expression figuree," &c, I have remarked : " Dans le travail-marchandiso 
qui est d'une realite effrayante, il (Proudhon) ne voit qu'une ellipse graunnaticale. 
Done, toute la societe actuelle, fondee sur le travail-marchandise, est desormais 
fondee sur une license poetique, sur une expression figuree. La socidte veut-elle 
•eliminer tous les inconvenh nts,' qui la travadlent, eh hien ! qu'clle (limine les 

terraei malsonnants, qu'elle change de langage, et pour cela elle n't qo' ft I'adn 
fcl'Aoademie pour lui demandex one nouvelle edition ds son diction nsire." (Karl 
Marx. " Misers de la Philosophic," p. 84, 3. r >.) It is naturally still more oonvenient 

SO understand hy value nothing at all. Then one can without difficulty lubsume 

everything under this category. Thus, f.o.,. I. B. Say; what is " valeur ! " AnSWei j 
" 0*est 00 <iu'une chose vaut," Mhd wliat is " pi i.\ '.' "' Answer; " Lii valeur dune 



548 Capitalist Production. 

Classical political economy borrowed from cvery-day life the 
category " price of labour " without further criticism, and then 
simply asked the question, how is this price determined ? It 
soon recognized that the change in the relations of demand 
and supply explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all 
other commodities, nothing except its changes, i.e., the oscilla- 
tions of the market price above or below a certain mean. If 
demand and supply balance, the oscillation of prices ceases, all 
other conditions remaining the same. But then demand and 
supply also cease to explain anything. The price of labour, at 
the moment when demand and supply are in equilibrium, is its 
natural price, determined independently of the relation of de- 
mand and supply. And how this price is determined, is just 
the question. Or a larger period of oscillations in the market- 
price is taken, e.g., a year, and they are found to cancel one the 
other, leaving a mean average quantity, a relatively constant 
magnitude. This had naturally to be deteimined otherwise 
than by its own compensating variations. This price which 
always finally predominates over the accidental market-prices 
of labour and regulates them, this " necessary price " (physio- 
crats) or " natural price " of labour (Adam Smith) can, as with 
all other commodities, be nothing else than its value expressed 
in money. In this way political economy expected to pene- 
trate athwart the accidental prices of labour, to the value of 
labour. As with other commodities, this value was determined 
by the cost of production. But what is the cost of production 
— of the labourer, i.e., the cost of producing or reproducing the 
labourer himself? This question unconsciously substituted 
itself in political economy for the original one ; for the search 
after the cost of production of labour as such turned in a circle 
and never left the spot. What economists therefore call value of 
labour, is in fact the value of labour-power, as it exists in the 
personality of the labourer, which is as different from its 
function, labour, as a machine is from the work it performs. 
Occupied with the difference between the market-price of 

chose exprimce en monnaie." And why has "le travail de la terre . . . une 
valeur? l'arce qu'on y met un prix." Therefore value is what a thing is worth, and 
the land has its "value," because its value is "expressed in money." This is, 
anyhow, a ?erj simple way ol explaining the why and the wherefore of things. 



Value of Labour- Power and Wages. 549 

labour and its so-called value, with the relation of this value 
to the rate of profit, and to the values of the commodities pro- 
duced by means of labour, &c., they never discovered that the 
course of the analysis had led not only from the market prices 
of labour to its presumed value, but had led to the resolution 
of this value of labour itself into the value of labour-power. 
Classical economy never arrived at a consciousness of the re- 
sults of its own analysis ; it accepted uncritically the categories 
" value of labour," " natural price of labour," &c., as final and 
as adequate expressions for the value-relation under con- 
sideration, and was thus led, as will be seen later, into inex- 
tricable confusion and contradiction, while it offered to the 
vulgar economists a secure basis of operations for their shallow- 
ness, which on principle worships appearances only. 

Let us next see how value (and price) of labour-power, 
present themselves in this transformed condition as wages. 

We know that the daily value of labour-power is calculated 
upon a certain length of the labourer's life, to which, again, 
corresponds a certain length of working-day. Assume the 
habitual working-day as 12 hours, the daily value of labour- 
power as 3s., the expression in money of a value that embodies 
(j hours of labour. If the labourer receives 3s., then he receives 
the value of his labour-power functioning through 12 hours. 
If, now, this value of a day's labour-power is expressed as the 
value of a day's labour itself, we have the formula: Twelve 
hours' labour has a value of 3s. The value of labour-power 
thus determines the value of labour, or, expressed in money, its 
necessary price. If, on the other hand, the price of labour- 
power differs from its value, in like manner the price of labour 
differs from its so-called value. 

As the value of labour is only an irrational expression for 
the value of labour-power, it follows, of couise, that the value 
of labour must always be less than the value it produces, for 
the capitalist always makes labour-power work longer than is 
necessary for the reproduction of its own value, in the above 
example, the value of the Labour-power that functions through 

lli hours is 3s., a value for the reproduction of which 6 hours 

are required, The value which the labour-power produces is, 



550 Capitalist Production. 

on the other hand, fis., because it, in fart, functions during 12 
hours, and the value it produces depends, not on its own 
value, but on the length of time it is in action. Thus, we have 
a result absurd at first sight — that labour which creates a value 
of Gs. possesses a value of 3s. 1 

We see, further : The value of 3s. by whir.h a part only of the 
working-day — i.e., 6 hours' labour — is paid for, appears as the 
value or price of the whole working-day of 12 hours, which 
thus includes hours unpaid for. The wage-form thus ex- 
tinguishes every trace of the division of the working-day into 
necessary labour and surplus-labour, into paid and unpaid 
labour. All labour appears as paid labour. In the corvee, 
the labour of the worker for himself, and his compulsory labour 
for his lord, differ in space and time in the clearest possible 
way. In slave-labour, even that part of the working-day in 
which the slave is only replacing the value of his own means 
of existence, in which, therefore, in fact, he works for himself 
alone, appears as labour for his master. All the slaves labour 
appears as unpaid, labour. 2 In wage-labour, on the contrary, 
even surplus labour, or unpaid labour, appears as paid. There 
the property -relation conceals the labour of the slave for him- 
self; here the money-relation conceals the unrequited labour 
of the wage-labourer. 

Hence, we may understand the decisive importance of the 
transformation of value and price of labour-power into the 
form of wages, or into the value and price of labour itself. 
This phenomenal form, which makes the actual relation invis- 
ible, and, indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, 
forms the basis of all the juridical notions of both labourer and 
capitalist, of all the mystifications of the capitalistic mode of 

1 Cf. Zur Kritik der Politischen (Ekonomie, p. 40, where I state that, in the por- 
tion of that work that deals with Capital, this problem will be solved : "How does 
production, on the basis of exchange-value determined simply by labour-time, lead to 
the result that the exchange-value of labour is less thai; the exchange-value of its 
product?" 

- The " Morning Star," a London free-trade organ, naif to silliness, protested again 
and again during the American civil war, with all the moral indignation of which 
man is capable, that the negro in the "Confederate States" worked absolutely for 
nothing. It should have compared the daily cost of such a negro with that of the 
free workman in the East end of London. 



Value of Labour- Power and Wages. 551 

production, of all its illusions as to liberty, of all the apologetic 
shifts of the vulgar economists. 

If history took a long time to get at the bottom of the 
mystery of wages, nothing, on the other hand, is more easy 
to understand than the necessity, the raison d'etre, of this 
phenomenon. 

The exchange between capital and labour at first presents 
itself to the mind in the same guise as the buying and selling 
of all other commodities. The buyer gives a certain sum of 
money, the seller an article of a nature different from money. 
The jurist's consciousness recognises in this, at most, a material 
difference, expressed in the juridically equivalent formulae : 
" Do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut des, facio ut facias." 

Further. Exchange-value and use-value, being intrin- 
sically incommensurable magnitudes, the expressions " value of 
labour," " price of labour," do not seem more irrational than the 
expressions " value of cotton," " price of cotton." Moreover, 
the labourer is paid after he has given his labour. In its 
function of means of payment, money realises subsequently 
the value or price of the article supplied — i.e., in this particular 
case, the value or price of the labour supplied. Finally, the 
use-value supplied by the labourer to the capitalist is not, in 
fact, his labour-power, but its function, some definite useful 
labour, the work of tailoring, shoemaking, spinning, &c. 
That this same labour is, on the other hand, the universal 
value-creating element, and thus possesses a property by which 
it differs from all other commodities, is beyond the cognisance 
of the ordinary mind. 

Let us put ourselves in the place of the labourer who 
receives for 12 hours' labour, say the value produced by G 
hours' labour, say 3s. For him, in fact, his 12 hours' labour 
is the means of buying the 3s. The value of his labour- 
power may vary, with the value of his usual means of subsist- 
ence, from 3 to 4 shillings, or from 8 to 2 shillings ; or, if the 
value of his labour-power remains constant, its price may, in 
consequence of changing relations of demand and supply, rise 
to 4s. or fall to 2s. He always gives 12 hours of labour. 
Every change in the amount of the equivalent that he receives 



552 Capitalist Prodtution. 

appears to him, therefore, necessarily as a change in the value 
or price of his 12 hours' work. This circumstance misled 
Adam Smith, who treated the working-day as a constant 
quantity, 1 to the assertion that the value of labour is constant, 
although the value of the means of subsistence may vary, and 
the same working-day, therefore, may represent itself in more, 
or less money for the labourer. 

Let us consider, on the other hand, the capitalist. He 
wishes to receive as much labour as possible for as little 
money as possible. Practically, therefore, the only thing that 
interests him is the difference between the price of labour- 
power and the value which its function creates. But, then, he 
tries to buy all commodities as cheaply as possible, and always 
accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying undei^ 
and selling over the value. Hence, he never comes to see that, 
if such a thing as the value of labour really existed, and he 
really paid this value, no capital would exist, his money 
would not be turned into capital. 

Moreover, the actual movement of wages presents pheno- 
mena which seem to prove that not the value of labour-power 
is paid, but the value of its function, of labour itself. We may 
reduce these phenomena to two great classes : (1.) Change of 
wages with the changing length of the working-day. One 
might as well conclude that not the value of a machine is paid, 
but that of its working, because it costs more to hire a machine 
for a week than for a day. (2.) The individual difference in 
the wages of different labourers who do the same kind of work. 
We find this individual difference, but are not deceived by it, 
in the system of slavery, where, frankly and openly, without any 
circumlocution, labour-power itself is sold. Only, in the slave 
system, the advantage of a labour-power above the average, 
and the disadvantage of a labour-power below the average, 
affects the slave-owner ; in the wage-labour system it affects 
the labourer himself, because his labour-power is, in the one 
case, sold by himself, in the other, by a third person. 

For the rest, in respect to the phenomenal form, " value and 

1 Adam Smith only accidentally alludes to the variation of the working-day when 
he is referring to piece-wages. 



Time- Wages, 553 

price of labour," or " wages," as contrasted with the essential 
relation manifested therein, viz., the value and price of labour- 
power, the same difference holds that holds in respect to all 
phenomena and their hidden substratum. The former appear 
directly and spontaneously as current modes of thought ; the 
latter must first be discovered by science. Classical political 
economy nearly touches the true relation of things, without, 
however, consciously formulating it. This it cannot so long as 
it sticks in its bourgeois skin. 



CHAPTER XX. 



TIME-WAGES. 



Wages themselves again take many forms, a fact not recogniz- 
able in the ordinary economical treatises which, exclusively 
interested in the material side of the question, neglect every 
difference of form. An exposition of all these forms however, 
belongs to the special stud}' of wage-labour, not therefore to 
this work. Still the two fundamental forms must be briefly 
worked out here. 

The sale of labour-power, as will be remembered, takes place 
for a definite period of time. The converted form under which 
the daily, weekly, &c., value of labour-power presents itself, is 
hence that of time-wages, therefore day-wages, &c. 

Next it is to be noted that the laws set forth, in the 17th 
chapter, on the changes in the relative magnitudes of price of 
labour-power and surplus-value, pass by a simple transforma- 
tion of form, into laws of wages. Similarly the distinction 
between the exchange-value of labour-power, and the sum of 
the necessaries of life into which this value is converted, now 
reappears as the distinction between nominal and real wa 
It would be useless to repeat here, with regard to the pheno- 
mena] form, what has been already worked out in the mi1>- 



554 Capitalist Production. 

stantial form. We limit ourselves therefore to a few points 
characteristic of time-wages. 

The sum of money * which the labourer receives for his daily 
or weekly labour, forms the amount of his nominal wages, or of 
his wages estimated in value. But it is clear that according 
to the length of the working-day, that is, according to the 
amount of actual labour daily supplied, the same daily or 
weekly wage may represent very different prices of labour, i.e., 
very different sums of money for the same quantity of labour. 2 
We must, therefore, in considering time-wages, again dis- 
tinguish between the sum total of the daily or weekly 
wages, &c, and the price of labour. How then to find this 
price, i.e., the money-value of a given quantity of labour ? The 
average price of labour is found, when the average daily value 
of the labour-power is divided by the average number of hours 
in the working-day. If, e.g., the daily value of labour-power is 
3 shillings, the value of the product of 6 working hours, and if 
the working-day is 12 hours, the price of 1 working hour is 
~ shillings — 3d. The price of the woiking hour thus found 
serves as the unit measure for the price of labour. 

It follows therefore that the daily and weekly wages, &c, 
may remain the same, although the price of labour falls con- 
stantly. If, e.g., the habitual working-day is 10 hours and the 
daily value of the labour-power 3s., the price of the working 
hour is 3|d. It falls to 3d. as soon as the working-day rises 
to 12 hours, to 2fd. as soon as it rises to 15 hours. Daily or 
weekly wages remain, despite all this, unchanged. On the 
contrary, the daily or weekly wages may rise, although the 
price of labour remains constant or even falls. If, e.g., the 
working day is 10 hours, and the daily value of labour- 
power 3 shillings, the price of one working hour is 3fd. 
If the labourer in consequence of increase of trade works 12 
hours, the price of labour remaining the same, his daily wage 

* The value of money itself is here always supposed constant. 

1 ' ' The price of labour is the sum paid for a given quantity of labour. : ' (Sir Edward 
West, " Trice of Corn and Wages of Labour." London, 1836, p. 67). West is the 
authoi of the anonymous " Essay on the Application of Capital to Land. By a 
Fellow of the University College of Oxford, London, 1815." An epoch making work 
il the history of political ec nomy. 



Time- Wages. 55^ 

now rises to 3 sliillin, 7 1. without any variation in the \ ' 
of labour. The name remit miffht follow if, [niitead oft 

ivc amount of labour, ill mtenjuve amount inci The 

of the nominal daily or weekly wagefl may thi 
accompanied by a price of labour thai remains) statioi 
falls. The a&rae holdi ; t 1 to the income of the labourer *e family, 
:i the quantity of labour expended by the bee 1 of the 
family i 1 increased by the labour of the memberi of bin family. 
There arc, th< methoda of Lowering the 1 1 labour 

independent of the reduction of the nominal daily 01 weekly 

A b general law it follows that, given the amount of daily, 
kly labour, fax, the daily or weeklj ad 00 the 

price of labour which, ther with the value 

Kabour^power, or with the difference between its pri i Its 

value. Given, on the other hand, the price of labour, the 
daily «»r weekly wagee depend on the quantity of the dailj 
weekly labour. 

TIjo unit in' the price of the w< rking- 

honr, 1- the quo! value of 1 day's labour-poi 

divided by the uumber of hoi 

\'i boon, and the daily value of labour-po 
.*> shillings, ti. »; fa >>i. > of Lai 



1 ' • 1 in: wages of lal rice of labour ladt '.ity of !■ 

r :n«<l \ii ply ui 

at rn. nt «»f tin- prioi >>f IaBow. From r - 1 1 1 -r -m: 

r may be considerably im-r BMd, *li. >f ItktW 

V. i.S, 1 1J. l'h Hjwj tin- 

• \ • U 

I •! by the f.m.iti ,v! r -present* ' 

tbe lHthoeatury, I 

. although bi put u 1 -■ nf -Mill «*•»> 

ami nut khi prw •• «»f it • weekly *v 

•I b) ti,.- |.nr.. «,f pr ,vt< ctMirii « 

Deoesaan* ■*, iii'I ti 

MmI<t manufacture!* . it Iher- if and f.llinn Ibo 

price of labour, beside* that 18,31.) in 

hi* "Thrsji Leeiures on t! I 

I mentioi inci|*ry 

«t- .1 in the amount tt wagra, ' p II . t: it o |o ■] Um lal |«*Hy 

«ti'<l in wliat lm rncriui, ' | i» wages, not in that ■ 

' of labour ' 



556 Capitalist Production. 

Under these circumstances the price of a working-hour is 8d., 
the value produced in it is 6d. If the labourer is now em- 
ployed less than 12 hours (or less than 6 days in the week), e.g., 
only 6 or 8 hours, he receives, with this price of labour, only 
2s. or Is. Gd. a day. 1 As on our hypothesis he must work on 
the average 6 hours daily, in order to produce a day's wage 
corresponding merely to the value of his labour-power, as 
according to the same hypothesis he works only half of every 
hour for himself, and half for the capitalist, it is clear that he 
cannot obtain for himself the value of the product of 6 hours 
if he is employed less than 12 hours. In previous chapters we 
saw the destructive consequences of over-work ; here we find 
the sources of the sufferings that result to the labourer from his 
insufficient employment. 

If the hour's wage is fixed so that the capitalist does not 
bind himself to pay a day's or a week's wage, but only to pay 
wages for the hours during which he chooses to employ the 
labourer, he can employ him for a shorter time than that which 
is originally the basis of the calculation of the hour-wage, or 
the unit-measure of the price of labour. Since this unit is 
determined by the ratio .. *g *?™f ^T*™™ . , it, of course, 

J working-day of a given number of hours? > 

loses all meaning as soon as the working-day ceases to con- 
tain a definite number of hours. The connexion between 
the paid and the unpaid labour is destroyed. . The capita- 
list can now wring from the labourer a certain quantity 
of surplus - labour without allowing him the labour-time 
necessary for his own subsistence. He can annihilate all 
regularity of employment, and according to his own con- 
venience, caprice, and the interest of the moment, make the 
most enormous over-work alternate with relative or absolute 
cessation of work. He can, under the pretence of paying " the 
normal price of labour," abnormally lengthen the working-day 

1 The effect of such an abnormal lessening of employment is quite different from 
that of a general reduction of the working-day, enforced by law. The former has 
nothing to do with the absolute length of the working-day, and may occur just as 
well in a working-day of 15, as of 6 hours. The normal price of labour is in the first 
case calculated on the labourer working 15 hours, in the second case on his working 
6 hours a day on the average. The result is therefore the same if he in the one case 
is employed only for 7?, in the other only for 3 hours. 



Time-Wages* 557 

without any corresponding compensation to the labourer. 
Hence the perfectly rational revolt in I860 of t' 
labourers, employed in the building trad unattl tnpt 

of the capitalists to impose on them this the 

hour. The legal limitation of the working-day put 
I ach mischief, although not, of course, to the diminution of 
employment I by the competition of machinery, by 

3 in the quality of the labourers employed, and bycri 
partial or . al 

With an inci g daily or weekly wage the price of labour 
may remain nominally constant, and ye( may fall below its 
norma] level This occurs •very time that, the price of labour 
kerned j ir working-hour) remaining constant, the work- 
lay is prolonged beyond its customary length. If in 
u: ,U:l ' the denominator u 

numerator in yel more rapidly. The value of labour- 

powi dependent on its wear and tear, inci with 

duration of Its functioning, and in more rapid proporti n tl 
the inci duration. In many bran I inda 

l1 rulu without legal limit* I 
me, the habit has, th< 
upofregardii working-day as Dormal only up 

tain p • 1 of I he tenth hi or (" normal 

rking-day,* * the day 1 • ilar hours of work 

»nd tl, • the n -time is over-time, and is, I 

: re, paid better ("extra ugh 

n in a pro] .1 idiculon .11 ' The d< a mal n 

tual working and 

the latl u bol 

The i •• in tin 

• "'I ').<• r»trof |.a . making) u»o»mall. fr 

that tt »u 

1 . 

•.■■•■« I....I l 1. ;«•:... I I I 

on willi i 

. tnd at; »ft< t that it overtime, »i 1 w« 

I 



558 Capitalist Prodtictiou. 

sion of the working-day beyond a certain normal limit, takes 
such a shape in various British industries that the low price 
of labour daring the so-called normal time compels the labourer 
to work during the better paid over-time, if he wishes to ob- 
tain a sufficient wage at all. 1 Legal limitation of the working- 
day puts an end to these amenities. 2 

It is a fact generally known that, the longer the working- 
days, in any branch of industry, the lower are the wages. 3 A. 
Redgrave, factory-inspector, illustrates this by a comparative 
review of the 20 years from 1839-1859, according to which 
wages rose in the factories under the 10 hours' law, whilst 
they fell in the factories in which the work lasted 14 to 15 
hours daily. 4 

From the law : "the price of labour bciing given, the daily 
or weekly wage depends on the quantity of labour expended," 

1 E.g., in the Scotch bleaching-works. "In some parts of Scotland this trade 
[before the introduction of the Factory Act in 1862] was carried on by a system of 
overtime, i.e., ten hours a day were the regular hours of work, for which a nominal 
wage of Is. 2d. per day was paid to a man, there being every day overtime for three or 
four hours, paid at the rate of 3d. per hour. The effect of this system ... a man could 
not earn more than 8s. per week when working the ordinary hours . . . without 
overtime they could not earn a fair day's wages. ;: (" Kept, of Insp. of Factories, 1 ' 
April 30th, 1803, p. 10.) "The higher wages, for getting adult males to work 
longer hours, are a temptation too strong to be resisted.' 5 (" Kept, of Insp. of Fact.," 
April 30th, 1848, p. 5.) The bookbinding trade in the city of London employs very 
many young girls from 14 to 15 years old, and that under indentures which prescribe 
certain definite hours of labour. Nevertheless, they work in the last week of each 
month until 10, 11, 12, or 1 o'clock at night, along with the older labourers, in a very 
mixed company. " The masters tempt them by extra pay and supper," which they 
eat in neighbouring public-houses. The great debauchery thus produced among 
these ' young immortals ' ("Children's Employment Comm., V. Kept.," p. 44, n. 
191) is compensated by the fact that among the rest many Bibles and religious books 
are bound by them. 

2 See " Reports of Insp. of Fact.," 30th April, 1863, 1. c. With very accurate ap- 
preciation of the state of things, the London labourers employed in the building 
trades declared, during the great strike and lockout of 1860, that they would only 
accept wages by the hour under two conditions (1) that, with the price of the work- 
ing-hour, a normal working-day of 9 and 10 hours respectively should be fixed, and 
that the price of the hour for the 10 hours 5 working-day should be higher than that 
for the hour of the 9 hours' working-day ; (2), that every hour beyond the normal 
working-day should be reckoned as overtime and proportionally more highly paid. 

3 " It is a very notable thing, too, that where long hours are the rule, small wages 
are also so." (" Report of Insp. of Fact.," 31st Oct., 1863, p. 9.) " The work which 
obtains the scanty pittance of food, is, for the most part, excessively prolonged. " 
(" Public Health, Sixth Report," 1864, p. 15.) 

* "Reports of Inspectors of Fact.," 30th April, 1860, pp. 31, 32. 



Ti))ic- ]\'agcs. 
it follows, first of all, that, the lower the price of labour, the 

greater most be the quantity of labour, or the * be 

the working-day for the labourer to secui i a mi 

townees of the pi ice of labour a ■• 
as a stimulus to the i ion of the labour-tin 

On the other han<l, the exi the working-tina 

due-, in its turn, a Gall in the price of labour, and with th 

fall in the day's or week's wag 

The determination of the price of labour by: 

daily T*)u* of Ubonr-povn 



I . Uk-<l»j uf » giveu uuiiiUr 

■hows thai a mere prolongation of the working-day lowers the 
j>ri '•• of labour, if no compensation steps in, Bui the same 
eircum I whicb allow the capitalist in the long run to 

prolong the working-day, also allow him first, and compel him 
finally, to n< minally lower the pi I labour, until the 4 
price of the in< I number of hours is lowered, and, th< 

the daily or weekly . B to two circumatai 

sufficient here. If one man does the work of l i 2 men, the 
supply of labour ii sltl igh the supply of Ial 

power "ii t he ma nt The o mpetiti »n I 

. between th<- labourers allows t 1m- capita'.; 
down the pri r, whilst the falling pi 

allow, him, on t' hand. \ up still further the 

me. 1 Soon, bo^i 

OUanl . quantities in • 

-o. ial amount, 1 

1 T' nail nul 

■ ■ r out t! 

n a "lay ' 
|Og«i I l'l. <t N , ami tin r \U>\ lOOH 

•>fl* altog<th< 

MM w"i | wage < ' 

rl the cuatomarjr long I 
*cn\ hy MM«IhmIj who . > . 

thro* f « inpl'.) in. ; I Ii.ipr«ion of Fact , 

*U of 
nrralljr he uiir-l . . onaeqacno* if 

14.J 



560 Capitalist Production. 

the capitalists themselves. A part of the price of the com- 
modity consists of the price of labour. The unpaid part of 
the labour-price need not be reckoned in the price of the com- 
modity. It may be presented to the buy^er. This is the first 
step to which competition leads. The second step to which it 
drives, is to exclude also from the selling-price of the commo- 
dity, at least a part of the abnormal surplus-value created by 
the extension of the working-day. In this way aD abnormally 
low selling-price of the commodity arises, at first sporadically, 
and becomes fixed by degrees; a lower selling-price which 
henceforward becomes the constant basis of a miserable wage 
for an excessive working-time, as originally it was the product 
of these very circumstances. This movement is simply indi- 
cated here, as the analysis of competition does not belong to 
this part of our subject. Nevertheless, the capitalist may, for 
a moment, speak for himself. " In Birmingham there is so 
much competition of masters one against another, that many 
are obliged to do things as employers that they would other- 
wise be ashamed of; and yet no more money is made, but only 
the public gets the benefit." 1 The reader will remember the 
two sorts of London bakers, of whom one sold the bread at its 
full price (the " full-priced ,: bakers), the other below its normal 
price ("the underpriced," "the undersellers "). The "full- 
priced " denounced their rivals before the Parliamentary Com- 
mittee of Inquiry : " They only exist now by first defrauding 
the public, and next getting 18 hours' work out of their men 
for 12 hours' wages. . . . The unpaid labour of the men was 
made . . . the source whereby the competition was carried on, 
and continues so to this day. . . . The competition among the 
master bakers is the cause of the difficulty in getting rid of 
night-work. An underseller, who sells his bread below the 
cost price according to the price of flour, must make it up by 
getting more out of the labour of the men. ... If I got only 
12 hours' work out of my men, and my neighour got 18 or 20, 
he must beat me in the selling price. If the men could insist 

on payment for over-work, this would be set right A 

large number of those employed by the undersellers are 

1 "Children's Employment Com., III. Rep., ,: Evidence, p. 66, n. 22. 



Pi -Wages. 561 

1 I youth*, v.}. 
■ 
Ti 

ilv of I ion mirroi 

in 1 1 a of the capitalist. 1 list does not km 

rmal pi ralso inclu definite quantity 

npaid labour, and tbj onpaid labour 11 

normal a, Tl urplus-labour-tu 

•til for him it is included in th<- norma] 

working irhich he thinks be h for in * 

I ; .• »vi.TtiiiiL' ■ him, the proloi 1 of 

the working daj limit- corresponding with I 

of lab I with his underselling << in - 

vertime He 

kii«.w that tlii y inchnlrs mi] 

I/iIm. w»-1! <•: mary how 

labour. I hour <•{ the 1 2 boon 1 

riue-prodt] working- 

t r, whilst l ' • hour is 4d 

I 1 1 1 In the Aral (^ase 

I \, 111 tll«' srf.,11.1, 

without i it. 



CilAl'l I IB Wl. 
PII I 



piece arc notliii in a converted f 

as wage* tin 

In {• • t as if I 

'IMMOOID|*l> nrjrmrj. I 

Un.l IMfcp 111, And \>> Krtdrne*. note* 179, S09, '.T Anyhow the full pck^l 

» itttonrtl a 

nrn "g«n«rfmlljr Ugtn «• ik at 11 p.| 

»'" then co(mf*«l all >Uy long . . . M Uto »• 7 o'cl«k tn U>« oti., 
[La., 



562 Capitalist Production. 

bought from the labourer was, not the function of his labour- 
power, living labour, but labour already realised in the pro- 
duct, and as if the price of this labour was determined, not as 
with time-wages, by the fraction : ^ y value of h w pgwer b t 

o > J ■ working day of given number of hours ^ vlw 

by the capacity for work of the producer. 1 

The confidence that trusts in this appearance ought to re- 
ceive a first severe shock from the fact that both forms of 
wages exist side by side, simultaneously, in the same branches 
of industry ; e.g., " the compositors of London, as a general rule r 
work by the piece, time-work being the exception, while those 
in the country work by the day, the exception being work by 
the piece. The shipwrights of the port of London work b}^ the 
job or piece, while those of all other parts work by the day." 2 

In the same saddlery shops of London, often for the same 
work, piece- wages are paid to the French, time-wages to the 
English. In the regular factories in which throughout piece- 
wages predominate, particular kinds of work are unsuitable to 
this form of wage, and are therefore paid by time. 3 But 
it is moreover self-evident that the difference of form in the 
payment of wages alters in no way their essential nature, 

1 "The system of piece-work illustrates an epoch in the history of the working 
man ; it is halfway between the position of the mere day labourer depending upon 
the will of the capitalist and the co-operative artisan, who in the not distant future 
promises to combine the artizan and the capitalist in his own person. Piece-workers 
are in fact their own masters, even whilst working upon the capital of the employer." 
(John Watts : " Trade Societies and Strikes, Machinery and Co-operative Societies." 
Manchester, 1865, p. 52, 53. ) I quote this little work because it is a very sink of all 
long-ago-rotten, apologetic commonplaces. This same Mr. Watts earlier traded in 
Owenism and published in 1842 another pamphlet : " Facts and Fictions of Political 
Economists," in which among other things he declares that " property is robbery." 
That is long ago. 

2 T. J. Dunning : "Trade's Unions and Strikes," Lond. 1860. p. 22. 

3 How the existence, side by side and simultaneously, of these two forms of wage 
favours the masters' cheating: "A factory employs 400 people, the half of which 
work by the piece, and have a direct interest in working longer hours. The other 
200 are paid by the day, work equally long with the others, and get no more money 
for their overtime. . . . The work of these 200 people for half an hour a day is equal 
to one person's work for 50 hours, or f of one person's labour in a week, and is a 
positive gain to the employer." ("Keports of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., I860,'' p. 9.) 
' ' Overworking to a very considerable extent still prevails ; and, in most instances, with 
that security against detection and punishment which the law itself affords. I have 
in many former reports shown the injury to workpeople who are not em- 
ployed on piece-work, but receive weekly wages." Leonard Horner in "Keports of 
Insp. of Fact." 30th April, 1859, pp. 8, 9.) 



Piece* Wages. 563 

although the one form may be m 

ment of ca] W diet production than the oth 

Lei bh< ordinary working day contain 12 how 
ure paid, 6 unpaid Let its value-product shilling 

oe hou >ur therefoi ■ 6 L Let as bu| 

irienoe, a labourer who work 
amount ity and skill, wh >nly 

the tn:. ally w y I - the production <>t' an arti 

supplies in 1- hours 24 , 1 distinct producl 

utinous whole. Then the valu 
2 bion of th 

capita] c mtained in them, is 6 shillin 

3 i. The labourei 1 I per | ad thus 

• ;n US in 12 b< I 3 n s. Ju . ith tini.-- 

bher we assume ti 
hours for hi in hours for the capitalist, or bal 

y hour for himself, and th pitalisl 

• matter whether we say that each indivi 
half paid, and half unpaid for, or that the price of IS 
pie© nt only of the vain-- of the laboui 

whilst in tlic other 1- [»irc.vs surplus-value is inc 
The form of piece wag as irrational as that oftii 

Whilst in l ampli' two pii-rrs ,.f a (Mini 

ibtracl ion of the \ alue of the m< ictiou i 

turned in them, are worth 6d as I luct of one hour, 

laboui I 

• ion of value. I 
a que I ion of mea luring I he i alue of tl 
me incoi | I in it, but on ti 

mea 

nuni I a tun- -wages the lal 

is m liate duration, in piece-wages by the 

: product - in u bich the laboui lia> < i 
< 1 u 1 1 1 1 / I'll.] 

•' In iliifV • 

i . . ■ ■ \ i 

|- ••.' ) i bt author of t: . f. 



564 Capitalist Production. 

value of labour-power. Piece-wage is, therefore, only a modi- 
fied form of time- wage. 

Let us now consider a little more closely the characteristic 
peculiarities of piece-wages. 

The quality of the labour is here controlled by the work 
itself, which must be of average perfection if the piece-price is 
to be paid in full. Piece-wages become, from this point of 
view, the most fruitful source of reductions of wages and capi- 
talistic cheating. 

They furnish to the capitalist an exact measure for the 
intensity of labour. Only the working- time which is em- 
bodied in a quantum of commodities determined beforehand 
and experimentally fixed, counts as socially necessary working 
time, and is paid as such. In the larger workshops of the 
London tailors, therefore, a certain piece of work, a waistcoat 
e.g., is called an hour, or half an hour, the hour at 6d. By 
practise it is known how much is the average product of 
one hour. With new fashions, repairs, etc., a contest arises 
between master and labourer, whether a particular piece of 
work is one hour, and so on, until here also experience decides. 
Similarly in the London furniture workshops, etc. If the 
labourer does not possess the average capacity, if he cannot in 
consequence supply a certain minimum of work per day, he is 
dismissed. 1 

Since the quality and intensity of the work are here con- 
trolled by the form of wage itself, superintendence of labour 
becomes in great part superfluous. Piece-wages therefore lay 
the foundation of the modern "domestic labour," described above, 
as well as of a hierarchically organised system of exploitation 
and oppression. The latter has two fundamental forms. On 
the one hand piece-wages facilitate the interposition of parasites 
between the capitalist and the wage-labourer, the " sub-letting 
of labour." The gain of these middle-men comes entirely from 

1 " So much weight of cotton is delivered to him [the spinner], and he has to return 
by a certain time, in lieu of it, a given weight of twist or yarn, of a certain degree of 
fineness, and he is paid so much per pound for all that he so returns. If his work is 
defective in quality, the penalty falls on him, if less in quantity than the minimum 
fixed for a given time, he is dismissed and an abler operative procured." (Ure 1. c. 
p. 317.) 



Piece-H . 565 

between the labour prL 
part of that price which tl. Alow to 

labourer. 1 In England this system fa chara 
call\- called tli On the other hand pi 

capitalist to make a oontraci 
• with the bead labourer — in manufactures with the chief 
: >up, in mines with the extractor of th . in the 

with the actual machine-worker— at a pi .which 

the head labourer himself undertakes the enlisting and , 
ment of his 1 ? it workpeople. The exploitation of the 

r by capital fa her I through the exploitation 

>urer by the labour* 
Given piece-wai:» , it is naturally th ■ [•••r>-»nal intei the 

train bis labour-power ai ini a> possible; 

this enables the capital] raise n ss&ly the normal «!••- 

I labour It is n rei now the p 
interest of the b si to lengthen the vrorking day, lince 
with it his daily kly wi This gradually brings 

1 " !• :lv pMMI tin lt| <;ich of which . 

ieh na< . .v..ik 

I Id. B C01 i i 

uhl he 11 

1 of pit < • 

• 

Oil t 'N Of tl. 

Child 1 I III |. ' '. p. 11. n. 1 _' I . p. \i. ... 1.. 

.il ctnagth u 

an »<l . with 1 

1 by Ibi iti k^ainat tl I • 

iiuclf a 1 

1 

r •■coin iik ii'U 'I t" tip !.u in< 1 » a» an .»i ; : ■ • ■ 1 «.u.-. 

•specially appltcal I women en. 

it At l'»W Wlt|l'l . 



566 Capitalist Production. 

on a reaction like that already described in time-wages, without 
reckoning that the prolongation of the working day, even if 
the piece- wage remains constant, includes of necessity a fall in 
the price of the labour. 

In time- wages, with few exceptions, the same wage holds for 
the same kind of work, whilst in piece- wages, though the price 
of the working time is measured by a certain quantity of 
product, the day's or week's wage will vary with the indi- 
vidual differences of the labourers, of whom one supplies in a 
given time the minimum of product only, another the average, 
a third more than the average. With regard to actual receipts 
there is, therefore, great variety according to the different skill, 
strength, energy, staying-power, etc., of the individual lab- 
ourers. 1 Of course this does not alter the general relations be- 
tween capital and wage-labour. First, the individual differ- 
ences balance one another in the workshop as a whole, which 
thus supplies in a given working- time the average product, 
and the total wages paid will be the average wages of that 
particular branch of industry. Second, the proportion between 
wages and surplus- value remains unaltered, since the mass of 
surplus-labour supplied by each particular labourer corres 
sponds with the wage received by him. But the wider scope 
that piece- wage gives to individuality, tends to develop on 
the one hand that individuality, and with it the sense of 
liberty, independence, and self-control of the labourers, on the 
other, their competition one with another. Piece-work has, 
therefore, a tendency, while raising individual wages above 
the average, to lower this average itself. But where a 
particular rate of piece- wage has for a long time been fixed by 
tradition, and its lowering, therefore, presented especial diffi- 
culties, the masters, in such exceptional cases, sometimes had 
recourse to its compulsory transformation into time- wages. 
Hence, e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the ribbon-weavers 



1 "Where the work in any trade is paid for by the piece at so much per job . . . 
wages may very materially differ in amount . . . But in work by the day there is 
generally an uniform rate . . . recognized by both employer and employed as the 
standard of wages for the general run of workmen in the trade. " (Dunning, 1. c. 
I>. 17.) 



Piece 'Wages. 567 

ntry. 1 Piece-wage is finally 
he hoc ribed in the preceding chapfc 

Prom what baa 1 shown 90 Car, it follows that piece-wi 

the form of •■ in harmony with the capitalist 

mode of production. Although by no means new — it 
side by side with tin. officially in the French and 

1 labour si ofthe L 4th century — it only conquers 

a larger field for action during the period of Ifanufad 
properlj died. In the stormy youth of Modern Industry, 

cially from 1797 to L815, \\ lerved r for the 

the working day, and the lowering ofwi 

. important materials for the fluctuati during 

riod ai bund in the Blue-books: "Report and 

Evidence from the Committee on Petitioi iting 

C Laws," Parliamentary Session of 1813-14), and 

port from \\, L 1 Committee, on the state of the 

• • ( and Consumption of drain, ami all L 

1814-15). Here ire find docu- 
menl ridenc I ot lowering of the prio 

1 .;.•<•■... 

( a-artiaana aawnt a\ pen prea comKii n d'ouTrage on oompagnu 

1 <>uvragr 
ir lcui 1 
i.-nai »ur la ' 

ured in I 
« from whom < I \ Smith havt tartly dl 

cwagi' an dimply a i 
! i • • from tli I 

1 < 

till-. i, 

li edition, 

! •. but 

1 nil roam unmatoa, boll 

\£V ..f til t 

n, acc«ir<: 

i 

I ill allat 

oommo on 1< « paU aux pttava, on • otirt aucuii i 

runt a la charf* ' i ' 

inal ciM 1 



5 68 Capitalist Production. 

labour from the beginning of the Anti-Jacobin War. In tne 
weaving industry, e.g., piece-wages had fallen so low that in 
spite of the very great lengthening of the working day, the 
daily wages were then lower than before. " The real earnings 
of the cotton weaver are now far less than they were ; his 
superiority over the common labourer, which at first was very 
great, has now almost entirely ceased. Indeed . . . the 
difference in the wages of skilful and common labour is far less 
now than at any former period." 1 How little the increased in- 
tensity and extension of labour through piece- wages benefited 
the agricultural proletariat, the following passage borrowed 
from a work on the side of the landlords and farmers shows ; 
" By far the greater part of agricultural operations is done by 
people, who are hired for the day or on piece-work. Their 
weekly wages are about 12s., and although it may be assumed 
that a man earns on piece-work under the greater stimulus to 
labour, Is. or perhaps 2s. more than on weekly wages, yet it is 
found, on calculating his total income, that his loss of employ- 
ment, during the year, outweighs this again . . . Further, it 
will generally be found that the wages of these men bear a 
certain proportion to the price of the necessary means of 
subsistence, so that a man with two children is able to bring 
up his family without recourse to parish relief." 2 Mai thus at 
that time remarked with reference to the facts published by 
Parliament : " I confess that I see, with misgiving, the great 
extension of the practice of piece-wage. Really hard work 
during 12 or 14 hours of the day, or for any longer time, is 
too much for any human being. " 3 

In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece-wage be- 
comes the general rule, because capital can there only increase 
the efficacy of the working day by intensifying labour. 4 

With the changing productiveness of labour the same quan- 
tum of product represents a varying working time. There- 
lore, piece-wage also varies, for it is the money expression of a 

1 Remarks on the Commercial Policy of Great Britain, London, 1815. 

2 A Defence of the Land-owners and Farmers of Great Britain, 1814, pp. 4, 5. 

3 Malthus, Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent, Lond., 1815. 

4 "Those who are paid by piece-work .... constitute probably four-fifths of the 
workers in the factories." " Report of Insp. ©f Fact., 30th April, 1858." 



Piece-Wag 

determined working time. In onr example 
irere produced in 12 boors, whilst the value of the product 
of the 12 hours was • ;.-., the daily value of the labour- 
power 3&j the price of the labour-hour 3d., and the * 
1'<1. In one piece half-an-hour'a Labour 
irbed. If the same working <lay now supplies, in conse- 
quence of the doubled producti of labour, 48 pi< 
ead of 2 1. and all other circumstano remain unchanj 
then tl: falls from 1M. to JcL, \y piece now 
..niy | of a working hour. 24 by l.M. 
— .Ms., an' 1 in like manner 48 by \>\. — 3a In otl i t words, 

1 in the same proportion i number of 

the pieces produced in the same time ri : and therei 

working time spent on the same piece falls. This change 

in piece-wi Ear purely nominal, lead ■ nt battles 

- capitalist and labour. Either because the capitalist 

■ daily Lowering the price of lal 

of 1 I productive power of labour is accompanied 

ii increase d intensify of the same. Or because the labourer 

is seriously the appearance of piece- m thathis | 

paid for, and not his labour-p . >lts 

mpanied by a Lowering in 
the selling pri the commodity. "Tb . . . . 

h the price of the raw mat. rial and the pri© I 
manufactured ud are thus enabled to form an a 

f their mi " a 

The capil I ly knocks on tl ucli ; 

iwer "f hii ■] !!itMor*l. 

ductiv is lft»t ■ igaii, 

■ ■ 

on« ftftv \N i hit will nut bi pahl at Um Ml 

M ho wh before, Imt a* that i l ibi .1 in - 

11 MfM< 
•f ho\r • >regoing tUtcmrtit n 

Mtj..h. «•. MtOO)|*nieJ \.\ iltaplMlag a j-uti-ii <>t idulta " 1 1, c, |». it'Jl . wl, . ! .»• 

•n wagoa. 

I 



570 Capitalist Production. 

as gross errors as to the nature of wage-labour. 1 He cries out 
against this usurping attempt to lay taxes on the advance of 
industry, and declares roundly that the productiveness of 
labour does not concern the labourer at all. 2 



CHAPTER XXII. 

NATIONAL DIFFERENCES OF WAGES. 

In the 17th chapter we were occupied with the manifold 
combinations which may bring about a change in magnitude 
of the value of labour-power — this magnitude being considered 
either absolutely or relatively, i.e., as compared with surplus- 
value ; whilst on the other hand, the quantum of the means of 
subsistence in which the price of labour is realised might 
again undergo fluctuations independent of, or different from, 
the changes of this price. 3 As has been already said, the simple 
translation of the value or respectively of the price of labour- 
power into the exoteric form of wages transforms all these 
laws into laws of the fluctuations of wages. That which 
appears in these fluctuations of wages within a single country 
as a series of varying combinations, may appear in different 
countries as contemporaneous difference of national wages. In 

1 In the London Standard of October 26, 1861, there is a report of proceedings of the 
firm of John Bright & Co., before the Rochdale magistrates "to prosecute for inti- 
midation the agents of the Carpet Weavers Trades' Union. Bright's partners had 
introduced new machinery which would turn out 240 yards of carpet in the time and 
with the labour (!) previously required to produce 160 yards. The workmen had no 
claim whatever to share in the profits made by the investment of their employer's 
capital in mechanical improvements. Accordingly, Messrs. Bright proposed to lower 
the rate of pay from lid. per yard to Id. , leaving the earnings of the men exactly 
the same as before for the same labour. But there was a nominal reduction, of 
which the operatives, it is asserted, had not fair warning before hand." 

2 " Trades' Unions, in their desire to maintain wages, endeavour to share in the 
benefits of improved machinery. {Quelle horreur !) .... the demanding higher 
wages, because labour is abbreviated, is in other words the endeavour to establish a 
duty on mechanical improvements." ("On Combination of Trades, new ed., London, 
1834," p. 42.) 

3 " It is not accurate to say that wages " (he deals here with their money expres 
sion) "are increased, because they purchase more of a cheaper article." (David 
Buchanan in his edition of Adam Smith's "Wealth," &c, 1814, Vol. I., p. 417. 
Note.) 



National Differences of Wages. 



D/ 



Che comparison of the wages in different nations, we most 
therefore take into account all the factors that determine 
changes in the amount of the value of labour-power; the i 
and the extent of the prime n< ries of life as naturally 

historically developed, the cost of training the labourers, the 
part played by the labour of women and children, the produc- 
tiveness of labour, its extensive and intensive magnitude. 
a the most superficial comparison requires the reduction 
of the avei day-wage for the same trades, in different 
countries, to a uniform world] After this reduction to 

the theday-i time-wagemu ans- 

piece-v j t he latter only can I asure both 

the productivity and the intensity of labour. 

In every country there i- a certain at intensity of 

:ir, below which the labour for the production 
modity requires more than the socially necessary time, and 
therefore does noi reckon as labour of normal quality. Only 
a degree of intensity e the national aver in a 

given country, the measure of value by the mere duration of 
the working time This is noi tl on the univei 

market, whose integral pari the individual countries 
average intensity of labour chai f m coui ontryj 

I national foi in a 

, u hose unii of i re is t he :•> unit of anil i 

or. The more in! a e national labour, then I 
I with the h intern s, produces in the same time more 

value, whieh • i- it .-If in in <!•• n 

Bui the !•!■'• of value in iti Internationa] application 

modified by this, thai on tl rld-markei the more 

lucl i\ •• oai ional labour i 

t tie more producth e mpelled by cotn- 

imodii 
I of their value 

In |> 

in t be ame pi a.1 int. n it \ 

producth ity of 1 the intei n 



cj2 Capitalist Production. 

The different quantities of commodities of the same kind, pro- 
duced in different countries in the same working time, have,, 
therefore, unequal international values, which are expressed in 
different prices, i.e., in sums of money varying according to 
international values. The relative value of money will, there- 
fore, be less in the nation with more developed capitalist 
mode of production than in the nation with less developed. 
It follows, then, that the nominal wages, the equivalent of 
labour-power expressed in money, will also be higher in the 
first nation than in the second ; which does not at all prove 
that this holds also for the real wages, i.e., for the means of 
subsistence placed at the disposal of the labourer. 

But even apart from these relative differences of the value 
of money in different countries, it will be found, frequently, 
that the daily or weekly, &c, wage in the first nation is higher 
than in the second, whilst the relative price of labour, i.e., the 
price of labour as compared both with surplus-value and with 
the value of the product, stands higher in the second than in 
the first. 1 

J. W. Co well, member of the Factory Commission of 1833, 
after careful investigation of the spinning trade, came to 
the conclusion that, " in England wages are virtually lower to 
the capitalist, though higher to the operative than on the 
Continent of Europe." (Ure, p. 314.) The English Factory 
Inspector, Alexander Redgrave, in his Report of Oct. 31st> 
1866, proves by comparative statistics with Continental states, 

1 James Anderson remarks in his polemic against Adam Smith : " It deserves, 
likewise, to be remarked, that although the apparent price of labour is usually lower 
in poor countries, where the produce of the soil, and grain in general, is cheap ; yet 
it is in fact for the most part really higher than in other countries. For it is not 
the wages that is given to the labourer per day that constitutes the real price of 
labour, although it is its apparent price. The real price is that which a certain quantity 
of work performed actually costs the employer ; and considered in this light, labour 
is in almost all cases cheaper in rich countries than in those that are poorer, although 
the price of grain, and other provisions, is usually much lower in the last than in 
the first . . . Labour estimated by the day, is much lower in Scotland than in 
England. . . Labour by the piece is generally cheaper in England. " (James Ander- 
son, Observations on the means of exciting a spirit of National Industry, &c. , Edin. 
1777, pp. 350, 351). On the contrary, lowness of wages produces, in its turn, dear- 
ness of labour. "Labour being dearer in Ireland than it is in England . . . because 
the wages are so much lower." (N. 2079 in Royal Commission on Railways,. 
Minutes, 1SG7." 



National Differences of ]} r agcs. 573 

that in spite of lower wages and much longer working-time, 
Continental labour is, in proportion to the product, dearer than 
English. An English manager of a cotton factory in Olden- 
borer, declares that the working-time there lasted from 5.30. a.m. 
to 8. p.m., Saturdays included, and that the workpeople ti. 
when under English overlookers, did not supply during this 
time quite so much product as the English in 10 hours, but 
under German overlookers much less. Wages are much lower 
than in England, in many cases 50% but the number of hands 
in proportion to the machinery was much greater, in certain 
departments in the proportion of 5:3. — Mr, Redgrave gives 
\. rv full details as to the Russian cotton factories. The data 
w«re given him by an English manager until recently em- 
ployed there. On this Russian soil, bo fruitful of all infamies, 
the old horrors of the early flays of English factories are in full 
■wing. The managers are, of course, English, as the native 
ian capitalist is of no use in factory business. Despite 
all over-work, continued day and night, de-pit.- the most 

shameful under-payment of the workpeople, Russian manu- 
ire manages to vegetate only by prohibition of foreign 
competition. I give, in conclusion, a comparative table of Mi. 
Redgrave's, on the average number of spindles per factory and 
I- r ipinner in the different countries of Europe. Be, himself, 
remarks thai in hod collected these Bgures a few yean 
and that since thai time the size of the factories and the 
number of ipindhs per labourer in England has Increased. 
He appo 1 . how* ver t an approximately equal pi in the 

Continental countries mentioned, so thai the numbers given 
would -till have their value for purp mparison. 

Average Number of Spindles peb Factory, 

Bnglai 'I, av< \t spindle per factory 12,1 00 

Kian „ , I 

I'" 1 i ; i. „ m H I 500 

i Igium, ,, I I 

Saxony, ,, 00 

•\>' ti 7 1 

Switzerland, „ 



c;-^ Capitalist Production. 

Average Number of Persons Employed to Spindles. 
France, one person to 14 spindles 



Russia, 


>> 


28 


Prussia, 


a 


37 


Bavaria, 


» 


46 


Austria, 


» 


49 


Belgium, 


j> 


50 


Saxony, 


» 


50 


Switzerland, 


jj 


55 


Smaller States 


of Germany, 


55 


Great Britain, 


j> 


74 



"This comparison," says Mr. Redgrave, " is yet more un- 
favourable to Great Britain, inasmuch as there is so large a 
number of factories in which weaving by power is carried on 
in conjunction with spinning [whilst in the table the weavers 
are not deducted], and the factories abroad are chiefly spinning 
factories ; if it were possible to compare like with like, strictly, 
I could find many cotton spinning factories in my district in 
which mules containing 2,200 spindles are minded by one 
man (the " minder ") and two assistants only, turning off daily 
220lbs. of yarn, measuring 400 miles in length." (Reports of 
Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., I860, p. 31-33, passim.) 

It is well known that in Eastern Europe as well as in Asia, 
English companies have undertaken the construction of rail- 
ways, and have, in making them, employed side by side with 
the native labourers, a certain number of English working- 
men. Compelled by practical necessity, they thus have had to 
take into account the national difference in the intensity of 
labour, but this has brought them no loss. Their experience 
shows that even if the height of wages corresponds more or 
less with the average intensity of labour, the relative price of 
labour varies generally in the inverse direction. 

In an " Essay on the Rate of Wages," 1 one of his first econo- 
mic writings, H. Carey tries to prove that the wages of the 
different nations are directly proportional to the degree of 

1 " Essay on the Rate of W^ges, with an Examination of the Causes of the Differ- 
ences in the Conditions of the Labouring Population throughout the World," Phila- 
delphia, 1835. 



National Differences of Wages. 



0/ o 



product] 3 of the national working days, in order to draw 

from this international relation, the c don that was 

everywhere rise and fall in proportion to the pro I 
of labour. The whole of our analysis of the production 
surplus-value shows the absurdity of this C »n<-lusion, even it 
Carey himself had proved his premises, instead of,after his usual 
uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to an 1 fro a confu 
bistical materials. The best of it is that he i 
not assert that things actually are as they ought to be accord- 
ing to his theory. For Stat' intervention has falsified the 
natural economic relations. The different national w; must 
be reckoned, therefore, as if that part of each that goea I i the 
• in the form of taxes, came to the labourer him 
bt n<.t Mr. Carey to consider further whether th 
expenses are not the u natural "' fruits of capitalistic develop- 
ment I The reasoning is quite worthy of the man who first 
declared the relation pitalist production I oal laws 

of nature and l whose free, harmonious working is only 

disturbed by the intervention of the : in order a: 

Is to discover that the diabolical influence of En land on 
tin- world-market (an influence which, it appears, does not 
ipring from thi natural law- of capitalist production) n 
mention, /'.' .. the protection of those I 
nature and d by th m of Prol I ion. 

He d further, that th.- th «ni I I; rdo and otl 

in which - il ant;i''(»ni>n and contradictions are 

formulated, ideal product of the real economic 

movement, bul on the contrary, that tl gonism 

eapitali I production in England and elsewhei ult 

ofthetheorie of fticardo and otl Finally, he di i 

that it i in the last n mm< roe I hat I be inboi d 

beaut id h.-u mon t mod of product 

A tap further, and be will, perhaps, di* • that the 
• vd in eapitali t production pita! itself. Only a man 

with ii. h at I .:'■ t . It) and Mich 

hpuriou ei uditi<>n «!■■ n \ - 1, in f h !':■■;. I ioni t I 

t" hi'Cuinr tin- irivl hi ei- nt the hai in 'i.-ni I 

•, and of all the oth I I ptimii I I I j 



PART VII. 
THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL. 



The conversion of a sum of money into means of production 
and labour-power, is the first step taken by the quantum of 
value that is going to function as capital. This conversion 
takes place in the market, within the sphere of circulation. 
The second step, the process of production, is complete so soon 
as the means of production have been converted into commodi- 
ties whose value exceeds that of their component parts, and, 
therefore, contains the capital originally advanced, plus a 
surplus-value. These commodities must then be thrown into 
circulation. They must be sold, their value realised in money, 
this money afresh converted into capital, and so over and over 
again. This circular movement, in which the same phases are 
continually gone through in succession, forms the circulation of 
capital. 

The first condition of accumulation is that the capitalist 
must have contrived to sell his commodities, and to reconvert 
into capital the greater part of the money so received. In the 
following pages we shall assume that capital circulates in its 
normal way. The detailed analysis of the process will be found 
in Book II. 

The capitalist who produces surplus-value — i.e., who extracts 
unpaid labour directly from the labourers, and fixes it in com- 
modities, is, indeed, the first appropriator, but by no means the 
ultimate owner, of this surplus- value. He has to share it with 
capitalists, with landowners, &c, who fulfil other functions in 
the complex of social production. Surplus-value, therefore, 
splits up into various parts. Its fragments fall to various cate- 



Simple Reproduction. 577 

gorie8 of persons, and take various forms, independent t 
of the other, such as profit, interest, merchants 1 profit, n 

3 only in Book III. that we can take in hand these modi 
forms of surplus- value. 

On the one hand, then, we assume that the Capitalist sells 
at their value the commodities he has produced, without 1 
oerning ourselves either about the new forms that capital 
assumes while in the Bphere of circulation, or about the c 
crete conditions of reproduction hidden under these forms. 
the other hand, we treat the capitalist producer as ownei 
the entire surplus-value, or, better perhaps, as the representa- 
tive of all the sharers with him in the booty. We, th< 
lore, first of all consider accumulation from an abstract 
point of view — 1>., as a mere phase in the actual pn 

duction 

accumulation bakes place, the capitalist must h 
succeed* I in Belling bis commodities, and in reconverting the 
lale-money into capital. Moreover, the breaking-up of surplus- 
ralue into fragments neither alters its nature nor the conditions 
under which it become an element of accumulation What- 
ever be the proportion of surplus-value which the indusi 
eapil If, or yields up t<> others, he is th-' 

u ho, in the first in . approprL We, 1 i 

ime no more than what actually takes place. On tli 

imple fundamental form of the pr< umula- 

ti'.u cured by the incid< at of the circulation which bi 

ad by the splitting up of Burplus-value, An 1 

anal tin- pn. .■.---. thci demands that WS should, 

ard all phenomena that hi play of it- in 

in. 



CHAPTER Will 
s 1 M i» I, k 1: 1 . I* 1: on 1 ■ 1 IT 1 N 

Wll \ l 1 vi l: t I. ' tin- j.p.c.-ss «»f |irud 

it 1 j 1 > 1 I be a continuou * pmc. 

\ 



$7 8 Capitalist Production. 

to produce than it can cease to consume. When viewed, there- 
fore, as a connected whole, and as flowing on with incessant 
renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, 
a process of reproduction. 

The conditions of production are also those of reproduction. 
No society can go on producing, in other words, no society can 
reproduce, unless it constantly reconverts a part of its products 
into means of production, or elements of fresh products. All 
other circumstances remaining the same, the only mode by 
which it can reproduce its wealth, and maintain it at one level, 
is by replacing the means of production — i.e., the instruments 
of labour, the raw material, and the auxiliary substances con- 
sumed in the course of the year — by an equal quantity of the 
same kind of articles ; these must be separated from the mass 
of the yearly products, and thrown afresh into the process of 
production. Hence, a definite portion of each year's product 
belongs to the domain of production. Destined for productive 
consumption from the very first, this portion exists, for the 
most part, in the shape of articles totally unfitted for individual 
consumption. 

If production be capitalistic in form, so, too, will be reproduc- 
tion. Just as in the former the labour-process figures but as a 
means towards the self-expansion of capital, so in the latter it 
figures but as a means of reproducing as capital — i.e., as self- 
expanding value, — the value advanced. It is only because his 
money constantly functions as capital that the economical guise 
of a capitalist attaches to a man. If, for instance, a sum of 
£100 has this year been converted into capital, and produced a 
surplus- value of £20, it must continue during next year, and 
subsequent years, to repeat the same operation. As a periodic 
increment of the capital advanced, or periodic fruit of capital 
in process, surplus- value acquires the form of a revenue flowing 
out of capital. 1 

1 "Mais ces riches, qui consomment les produits du travail des autres, ne peu- 
vent les obtenir que par des echanges [purchases of commodities]. S'ils donnent ce- 
pendant leur richesse acquise et accumulee en retour contre ces produits nouveaux qui 
sont i'objet de leur fantaisie, ils semblent exposes a epuiser bientot leur fonds de 
reserve ; ils ne travaillent point, avons-nous dit, et ils ne peuvent meme travailler ; 
on croirait done que chaque jour doit voir diminuer leurs vieilles richesses, et que lors- 



Simple Reproduction. 

If* t h i the capitalist onl; fond to provide 

I his consumption, and be spent as periodically as \\ ned, 

then, c paribus, simple reproduction will take pi 

; although this reproduction is a mere repetition of the pro- 
of production on the old scale! yet this mere repetition, or 
binuity, gives a new character to the process, or, rather, 
causes the disappearance of some apparent characteristics 
which it p I as an isolated discontinuous pi 

The purchase of labour-power for a fixed period is the pre- 
lude to the process of production j and this prelude is constai 

I when the stipulated term comes to an end, when s 
definite period ol production, each a> a week or a month, has 
elapsed. But the labourer is not paid until after he has 
led bia labour-power, and realised in commodities not only 
.aim-, but surplus-value He has, thej produced not 

only Burplus-value, which we for the present regard as i fond 
(so meet the private consumption of the capitalist, bat he has 
produced, before it flows back I i him in the shape <>t* 
the fund out of which he himself Lb paid, the variable 
baJ ; and his employment lasts only bo long as he continues 
produce this fund Bence, that formula of the economi 
, to in Chaptei XVIII., which represents w 
•bare in the product itself. 1 What flows back to tin- labourer 
h tli.- shape of wag< portion of the product thai 

tinuously repi i by him. The capitalist, it is true, | 

liim in i money la merely the transmuted form 

of the product of his labour. While he rertinj 

of tl ■ ion into product d of bia I 

I duct i turned into money. It la his labour of 

<|u i! i. .!•.:. n rcatcrm pin* *ax% off*»rt en Mi. 

'»« Inurement pov Mai* <lan« 1 '« >r .1 r «• ncial, la richeaee a ■ 

<|. m rtproduire |i*r li travail d'aotrui, at ean* qva mi pfopriatatn % oooooon 1 .» 

ikhcHo, coinii ir lo travail, OjOMM un fruit mmm I 

iWWi.c »,i 

• 

i : 

• a* writ ** |>r<>!it « a ooaeioeretl, each of them, a* 

• hiil |-r > 

*gr«." (J. Mill, KWmenU. \< 1 
..t. pfcrfc, 1MB 



580 Capitalist Production. 

last week, or of last year, that pays for his labour-power this, 
week or this year. The illusion begotten by the intervention 
of money vanishes immediately, if, instead of taking a single 
capitalist and a single labourer, we take the class of capitalists 
and the class of labourers as a whole. The capitalist class is 
constantly giving to the labouring class order-notes, in the form 
of money, on a portion of the commodities produced by the 
latter and appropriated by the former. The labourers give 
these order-notes back just as constantly to the capitalist class,, 
and in this way get their share of their own product. The 
transaction is veiled by the commodity-form of the product 
and the money-form of the commodity. 

Variable capital is therefore only a particular historical form 
of appearance of the fund for providing the necessaries of life, 
or the labour-fund which the labourer inquires for the main- 
tenance of himself and family, and which, whatever be the 
system of social production, he must himself produce and repro- 
duce. If the labour-fund constantly flows to him in the form 
of money that pays for his labour, it is because the product 
he has created moves constantly away from him in the form 
of capital. But all this does not alter the fact, that it is the 
labourer's own labour, realised in a product, which is advanced 
to him by the capitalist. 1 Let us take a peasant liable to do 
compulsory service for his lord. He works on his own land, 
with his own means of production, for, say, 3 days a week. 
The 3 other days he does forced work on the lord's domain. 
He constantly reproduces his own labour- fund, which never, 
in his case, takes the form of a money payment for his labour,, 
advanced by another person. But in return, his unpaid forced 
labour for the lord, on its side, never acquires the character of 
voluntary paid labour. If one fine morning the lord appro- 
priates to himself the land, the cattle, the seed, in a word, the 
means of production of this peasant, the latter will thenceforth 
be obliged to sell his labour-power to the lord. He will, ceteris 
paribus, labour 6 days a week as before, 3 for himself, 3 for 

1 "When capital is employed in advancing to the workman his wages, it adds 
nothing to the funds for the maintenance of labour.' 1 (Cazenove in note to his 
edition of Malthus, Definitions in Fol. Econ. London, 1853, p. 22.) 



Simple Reproduction. 

hi*> lord, who thenceforth becomes a wages-paying capital] 
As before, he will use up the means of production of 

production, and tra their value to the product. As I 

a definite portion of the product will I reproduc- 

tion, JJm from the moment that the forced labour Lb chan 
im<> wage-labour, from that moment the labour-fund, which 
the peasant himself continues at before t i pro luce ;lm<1 repro- 
<li; the form of ;i capital advanced in the form 

by the lord. The bourgeois economist whose narrow 
mind is unable v> separate the form <>:' appearan m the 

thing thai appears, shuts hi- eyes I i the met, that it is but he 

.1 there on the fi urth, that even now-a-days the 

labour-fund crops up in the form of capita 

Variable capital, it is true, only then loses its character of a 
i ou( of the capitalist's funds,* when we vi 
tli i-;i|)it;ili>t production in the flow of Its constant 

aewaL But thai pi must have had a beginning 

kind. From our ; band-point it therefore seems likely 

pitalist, once upon a time, became p ed of 

accumulation thai took place indej itiy 

of the nri|»;ii'l labour of others, and that this was, thei 
how he was enabled to frequent the market as a buyer of 
i I .v. ever I hi may be, I he mere continuity 1 4 
tin* |ip»r.^«\ thf >iiii|i|.' n-ppMluction, brings about some oth 
wonderful chan rhich affect uly the variable, but tl 

tal. 
It' ;i capital • 1000 alue of £200, 

•lift!, alue b r, it is Hear 

he end of 5 nrplus-value c nsumed will 

..tint to 5 x £200 or the £1000 iriginally advanced. It" only 
a : one half, n • re led, t i. , It w ould 

follow 10 y< I" • 

irtgM <>f labour • ItM (ii.ui one 

th <»f tl HI «»f th" tftl 

|| 

vft^. • A'lvailCCHl t" 

riAhty OOSM <"•«• WMfvs heintf 



582 Capitalist Production. 

General Rule : The value of the capital advanced divided by 
the surplus-value annually consumed, gives the number of 
years, or reproduction periods, at the expiration of which the 
capital originally advanced has been consumed by the capitalist 
and has disappeared. The capitalist thinks, that he is con- 
suming the produce of the unpaid labour of others, i.e., the 
surplus- value, and is keeping intact his original capital ; but 
what he thinks cannot alter facts. After the lapse of a certain 
number of years, the capital value he then possesses is equal 
to the sum total of the surplus-value appropriated by him 
during those years, and the total value he has consumed is 
equal to that of his original capital. It is true, he has in hand 
a capital whose amount has not changed, and of which a part, 
viz., the buildings, machinery, &c, were already there when 
the work of his business began. But what we have to do with 
here, is not the material elements, but the value, of that capital. 
When a person gets through all his property, by taking upon 
himself debts equal to the value of that property, it is clear 
that his property represents nothing but the sum total of his 
debts. And so it is with the capitalist ; when he has con- 
sumed the equivalent of his original capital, the value of his 
present capital represents nothing but the total amount of the 
surplus-value appropriated by him without payment. Not a 
single atom of the value of his old capital continues to exist. 

Apart then from all accumulation, the mere continuity of 
the process of production, in other words simple reproduction, 
sooner or later, and of necessity, converts every capital into 
accumulated capital, or capitalised surplus-value. Even if that 
capital was originally acquired by the personal labour of its 
employer, it sooner or later becomes value appropriated with- 
out an equivalent, the unpaid labour of others materialised 
either in money or in some other object. We saw in chapter 
IV. that in order to convert money into capital something more 
is required than the production and circulation of commodities. 
We saw that on the one side the possessor of value or money, 
on the other, the possessor of the value-creating substance ; 
on the one side, the possessor of the means of production and 
subsistence, on the other, the possessor of nothing but labour- 



Simple Reproduction. 

power, must confront one another as buyer and seller. The 

juration of labour from its product, of subjecth or-po* 

from the objective conditions of labour, was therefore the real 
foundation in fact,and the starting pointof capitalisl producti 

But that which at first was but a starting p tint, 1 

by the mere continuity of the process, by simple reproduction, 
the peculiar result, constantly renewed and perpetuated, 
capitalist production. On the one hand, the pro 
duction iii' antly c invert materia] wealth into capital, into 
means of creating more wealth and means of enjoyment fort! 
pitalist On the other hand the labourer, on quitting I 
process, is what he was on entering it, a source of wealth, but 
devoid of all means of maJritig that wealth his own. Sin 

on the process, his own labour has already been 
alienated from himself by the Bale of his labour-power, has 
an appropriated by the capitalist and mcorporated with 
capital, it must, during the process, be realised In a product 
that does not belong I i him. nee the \ - of pi 

duction is also the process by which the capitali 
labour-power, the produci of the labourer is incessantly con- 
nly into commodities, but into capital, into value 
at Bucks up the value-creating power, into mean ib- 

tence that buy the person of the labourer, into means 
production that command the producers The labourer then 

foi tantly piodue.-s material, objective wealth, but in the 

form oi capital, of an alien power that dominates and explu 

him; and tie- capitalist as constantly produces labour-power, 
but in the form of a subjective source of wealth, separated from 

obj< ci m and by n hich it ••an alone !>«• realised ; in he 

duces the Lai a wage-labourei i -s.sant 

1 •■ , 

come* oapiial by oon 
Jarnea Mill, h 
I 

•d, that - 
■ omn not to be *>, unl tin- < ooti&aaiM i * 

ion i»f \\ i. ndoo, l * • r r . J'. i lly 

■ ■ > ' : 

Of a tuiu|«ar»t 
i»iol»». 1 



58/^ Capitalist Production. 

reproduction, this perpetuation of the labourer, is the sine qua 
non of capitalist production. 

The labourer consumes in a twofold way. While producing 
he consumes by his labour the means of production, and con- 
verts them into products with a higher value than that of the 
capital advanced. This is his productive consumption. It is 
at the same time consumption of his labcur-power by the 
capitalist who bought it. On the other hand, the labourer 
turns the money paid to him for his labour-power, into means 
of subsistence : this is his individual consumption. The 
labourer's productive consumption, and his individual con- 
sumption, are therefore totally distinct. In the former, he acts 
as the motive power of capital, and belongs to the capitalist. 
In the latter, he belongs to himself, and performs his necessary 
vital functions outside the process of production. The result 
of the one is, that the capitalist lives ; of the other, that the 
labourer lives. 

When treating of the working-day, we saw that the labourer 
is often compelled to make his individual consumption a mere 
incident of production. In such a case, he supplies himself 
with necessaries in order to maintain his labour-power, just as 
coal and water are supplied to the steam engine and oil to the 
wheel. His means of consumption, in that case, are the mere 
means of consumption required by a means of production ; his 
individual consumption is directly productive consumption. 
This, however, appears to be an abuse not essentially apper- 
taining to capitalist production. 1 

The matter takes quite another aspect, when we contemplate, 
not the single capitalist, and the single labourer, but the 
capitalist class and the labouring class, not an isolated process 
of production, but capitalist production in full swing, and on 
its actual social scale. By converting part of his capital into 
labour-power, the capitalist augments the value of his entire 
capital. He kills two birds with one stone. He profits, not 
only by what he receives from, but by what he gives to, the 
labourer. The capital given in exchange for labour-power is 

1 Rossi would not declaim so emphatically against this, had he really penetrated 
the secret of " productive consumption." 



Simple Reproduction. 585 

converted into necessaries, by the consumption of which the 
muscles, nerves, bones, and brains of existing labour 
reproduced, and new labourers are begotten. Within the 
limits of what is strictly necessary, the individual consumption 
of the working class is, thei version < t them 

ace given by capital in exchange for labour-power, 
into fresh labour-power at tip- disposal of capital for 
tion. It is the production and reproduction of that m 
production bo indispensible to the capitalist: the labou 
himself The individual consumpti d of the labourer, whether 
it proceed within the workshop or outside it, whether it be part 
of the process of production or not, forms therefore a factor of 
the production and reprodncti d of capital; ju leaning 

machinery does, whether it be done while the machinery is 
working or while it is standir The fact thi labou 

eonsumefl his means of subsistence for bis own pui and 

not ■ the capitalist, has no bearing on the matter. The 

consumption of food by 1 of burden is none the 1« 

■ ■-sary factor in the pro. f production, I 

enjoys what it eats. The maintenance and reproduc I the 
and m odition to the 

roduction of capital. But the capitalist may safely L 

fulfilment to the labour tincts 

of pro] .1. All the capital the 

labourer 1 ! individual consumption as fai 

strictly n< and he is far away from imitating t: 

brutal South Americ who foi ir labourers to take the 

; • 1 1 , rather than the tantial, kind of fi 

I [( 1 tfa the capitalist and his id- ■ t he 

r that us of the labou 

Individ mption to be productive, which is requisite for 

the |" i ["-tu.'it ion i.f tie- 1 • 1 : 1 -«.. and which thei 

a, who* tost per* 

hftps in the woi '.ii. to thi »»:•' tluir »!. 

1 .hi pr. f. 1 tin bn id 

r-, who i ... 

••in to ret bean*; beaaa, however, are re I 

1 ■ ■ '• • 1 1 1 1 i ■ . 
1 



586 Capitalist Production. 

place in order that the capitalist may have labour-power to* 
consume; what the labourer consumes for his own pleasure 
beyond that part, is unproductive consumption. 1 If the 
accumulation of capital were to cause a rise of wages and an 
increase in the labourer's consumption, unaccompanied by 
increase in the consumption of labour-power by capital, the 
additional capital would be consumed unproductively. 2 In 
reality, the individual consumption of the labourer is unproduc- 
tive as regards himself, for it reproduces nothing but the needy 
individual ; it is productive to the capitalist and to the State, 
since it is the production of the power that creates their 
wealth. 3 

From a social point of view, therefore, the working-class, 
even when not directly engaged in the labour-process, is just 
as much an appendage of capital as the ordinary instruments 
of labour. Even its individual consumption is, within certain 
limits, a mere factor in the process of production. That process, 
however, takes good care to prevent these self-conscious instru- 
ments from leaving it in the lurch, for it removes their product,, 
as fast as it is made, from their pole to the opposite pole of 
capital. Individual consumption provides, on the one hand, 
the means for their maintenance and reproduction : on the 
other hand, it secures by the annihilation of the necessaries of 
life, the continued reappearance of the workman in the labour- 
market. The Roman slave was held by fetters : the wage- 
labourer is bound to his owner by invisible threads. The 
appearance of independence is kept up by means of a constant 
change of employers, and by the fictio juris of a contract. 

In former times, capital resorted to legislation, whenever 
necessary, to enforce its proprietary rights over the free 
labourer. For instance, down to 1815, the emigration of 

1 James Mill, 1. c. , p. 238. 

2 " If the price of labour should rise so high that, notwithstanding the increase of 
capital, no more could be employed, I should say that such increase of capital would 
be still unproductively consumed." (Ricardo, 1. c, p. 163.) 

3 " The only productive consumption, properly so-called, is the consumption or 
destruction of wealth " (he alludes to the means of production) " by capitalists with 
a view to reproduction .... The workman .... is a productive consumer to the 
person who employs him, and to the State, but not, strictly speaking, to himself.'" 
(Malthus' Definitions, &c, p. 30.) 



Simple Reproduction. - J 

mechanics employed in machine maki] . in England, I 

bidden, under '_ r ii< ■ \ « -u - pains and p oalii 

The reproduction of the working class carries with it I 
accumulation of skill, that is handed down from i ition 

to another. 1 To what • the capitalist reckons ti. 

tence of such a skilled c imong the factors of produci 
thai belong to him by right, and to what extent he actually 
regards it as the reality of his variable capital, i 
as a crisis threatens him with its Loss. In consequence of the 
civil war in the United SI andoftfa mpanying 

famine, the majority of the <'"tt' mi tives in Lancashire 

were, as is well known, thrown out of work. Both from the 
woi long-class itself, and from other rank- of society, bhei 
a cry for State aid, or for voluntary national subscriptions, in 
order to enable the " superfluous " hands to en to the 

colonies or to the United SI Thereupon, the "Tim 

published on the 24th March, L863, ■ Letter from Edmund 
er, a former president of the Manchester Chamber of 
Commerce. This letter was rightly called in the Bona 
Commons, the manufacturers 1 manifesto. 1 We cull here a few 

<•hai.iri.-ii. tic passages, in which the, j>r«i{.! jhts "1' 

capital over labour-powe] unblushin lerted. 

M He the man oul of work] "may be told the Buppij 
>n-workei ... and .... must .... in 

feci be reduced by a third, perhaps, and that then there will be 
a healthy demand for the remaining two-thirds .... Public 
opinion .... urges emigration .... The master cannot 
willinglj bis labour suppl; removed; bemaythi 

and perha] I ly, thai it 

Hut if the publie fa] migration, 

he has a right to I rd, and perhaps to | 

I ben b m how u ■ ful th< the 

1 < ll nil. ■ I 

r taut Of . . .■ great ln»» 

Accompluhc'U a 

• » <>f tin* manuf.k 



^SS Capitalist Production. 

" trade has undoubtedly drawn the surplus-population from 
Ireland and from the agricultural districts," how immense is its 
extent, how in the year 18 GO it yielded T %ths of the total English 
exports, how, after a few years, it will again expand by the 
extension of the market, particularly of the Indian market, and 
by calling forth a plentiful supply of cotton at 6d. per lb. He 
then continues : " Some time . . . , one, two, or three years, it 
may be, will produce the quantity .... The question I would 
put then is this — Is the trade worth retaining ? Is it worth 
while to keep the machinery (he means the living labour 
machines) in order, and is it not the greatest folly to think of 
parting with that ? I think it is. I allow that the workers 
are not a property, not the property of Lancashire and the 
masters ; but they are the strength of both ; they are the 
mental and trained power which cannot be replaced for a gene- 
ration ; the mere machinery which they work might much of 
it be beneficially replaced, nay improved, in a twelvemonth. 1 
Encourage or allow (!) the working-power to emigrate, and 
what of the capitalist ? . . . . Take away the cream of 
the workers, and fixed capital will depreciate in a great degree, 
and the floating will not subject itself to a struggle with the 
short supply of inferior labour .... We are told the 
workers wish it " (emigration). " Very natural it is that they 
should do so ... . Reduce, compress the cotton trade 
by taking away its working power and reducing their wages 
expenditure, say one-fifth, or five millions, and what then would 
happen to the class above, the small shopkeepers ; and what of 
the rents, the cottage rents .... Trace out the effects 
upward to the small farmer, the better householder, and .... 



1 It will not be forgotten that this same capital sings quite another song, under 
ordinary circumstances, when there is a question of reducing wages. Then the 
masters exclaim with one voice : " The factory operatives should keep in wholesome 
remembrance the fact that theirs is really a low species of skilled labour ; and that 
there is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply remuner- 
ated, or which, by a short training of the least expert, can be more quickly, as well 
as abundantly, acquired .... The master's machinery "(which we now learn can be 
replaced with advantage in 12 months) " really plays a far more important part in 
the business of production than the labour and skill of the operative " (who cannot 
now be replaced under 30 years), " which six months' education can teach, and a 
common labourer can learn." (See ante, p. 423.) 



Simple Reproduction. 5 

the landowner, and say if there could be any suggestion m 
suicidal to all classes of the country than bj ag a 

nation by exporting the best of its manufacturing 
and destroying the value of some of it- most productive 
capital and enrichment .... I advise a loan (of li\ 
six millions sterling), .... extending it may be 01 
three years, administered by special commissioners added to the 
Boards of Guardians in the cotton districts, under special 1 
lath dations, enforcing some occupation or labour, 

means of keeping up at least the moral standard of tip arts 

of th<; loan .... can anything be w for landown 

masters than parting with the I i»anddem 

Using and disappoints reel by an aded depletive 

emigration, a depletion of capital and value in an entire 
proi ince ? " 

Potter, the chosen mouthpiece of the manufacturers, distin- 
guishes two soil of "machinery/ 1 each of which 1 1 to the 
capital: b, and of which one stands in 1 other ai 
night-time and on Sim. lays is housed outside the fad >ry, in 
cottages. The one ia inanimate, the other Living. The inani- 
mate machinery noi only p out and depi from day 
to day, bul t part of it becom quickly super-annu- 
ated, 1 'ant technical 1 it can i 
with advarj > machinery afi w month 
living machin d the contrary, ir it 

. and in proportion as the skill, handed from one 
tin to anothi nmulal The " Tin 

^11 h ii ■ 

Hr. Edmund Potl with the < rial 

and inpreino iinportanc." «-f tic- cotton in that, in Ol 

U* pi 1 pei i their | 1 >n, he would 

B million of the luhoui itincd in . 

thouse again K their will l 

taiic Ml' I hy all honesi m 

I I* v. fill win machinery in 

Mil' II th.« 

ion' 1 \ Mi Pottei the human machin< 

#»«■ .-.ii !<• a that h< mean 



590 Capitalist Production. 

absolute property. We must confess that we do not think it 
' worth while/ or even possible, to keep the human machinery 
in order — that is to shut it up and keep it oiled till it is 
wanted. Human machinery ivill rust under inaction, oil and 
rub it as you may. Moreover, the human machinery will, as 
we have just seen, get the steam up of its own accord, and 
burst or run a muck in our great towns. It might, as Mr. 
Potter says, require some time to reproduce the workers, but, 
having machinists and capitalists at hand, we could always find 
thrifty, hard, industrious men wherewith to improvise more 
master manufacturers than we can ever want. Mr. Potter 
talks of the trade reviving ' in one, two, or three years,' and 
he asks us not ' to encourage or allow (!) the working power to 
emigrate. ' He says that it is very natural the workers should 
wish to emigrate ; but he thinks that in spite of their desire, 
the nation ought to keep this half million of workers with 
their 700,000 dependents, shut up in the cotton districts ; and 
as a necessary consequence, he must of course think that the 
nation ought to keep down their discontent by force, and sus- 
stain them by alms — and upon the chance that the cotton 
masters may some day want them . . . The time is come 
when the great public opinion of these islands must operate to 
save this ' working power ' from those who would deal with it 
as they would deal with iron, and coal, and cotton." 

The "Times' " article was only a jeu d'esprit. The " great 
public opinion " was, in fact, of Mr. Potter's opinion, that the 
factory operatives are part of the movable fittings of a factory. 
Their emigration was prevented. 1 They were locked up in 
that "moral workhouse," the cotton districts, and they form, 
as before, " the strength " of the cotton manufacturers of Lan- 
cashire. 

1 Parliament did not vote a single farthing in aid of emigration, but simply passed 
some Acts empowering the municipal corporations to keep the operatives in a half- 
starved state, i.e., to exploit them at less than the normal wages. On the other 
hand, when 3 years later, the cattle disease broke out, Parliament broke wildly 
through its usages and voted, straight off, millions for indemnifying the millionaire 
landlords, whose farmers in any event came off without loss, owing to the rise in the 
price of meat. The bull-like bellow of the landed proprietors at the opening of Par- 
liament, in 18G6, showed that a man can worship the cow Sabala without being a 
Hindoo, and can change himself into an ox without being a Jupiter 



Si7nple Reprodtution. 591 

Capitalist production, therefore, of itself reproduces the 
separation between labour-power and the means of labour. It 
thereby reproduces and perpetuates the condition for exploit- 
ing the labourer. It incessantly forces him to Bell hifl labour- 
power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to purchase 
labour-power in order that he may enrich himself. 1 It is no 
longer a mere accident, that capitalist and labourer confront 
each other in the market as buyer and seller. ]t is the pi- 
f that incessantly hurls back the labourer on to the market 
vendor of hifl labour-power, and that incessantly converts 
hifl own product into a means by which another man can pur- 
chase him. In reality, the labourer belongs to capital, before 
he has Bold himself to capital. His economical bondage 1 is 
both brought about and concealed by the periodic sale of him- 
self, by his change of masters, and by the oscillations in the 
market price of labour-powtr. 

I pitalist production, therefore, under its aspect of ■ con- 
tinuous connected process, of a pro< £ reproduction, pro- 
ot only commodities, not only Burplus-value, but it also 
produces and reproduces the capitalist relation ; on the one 
side the capitalist, on the other the wage-laboun 

1 " !.'.»•:•. r;.r ■ !• wiruuhiit 'I itfej -no- ].<mii vivrv, |fl ch.f ilrmamlait <lu t: 

i jwihhhM, L c., p. PL 1 

boorishly clumsy form of this bondlgf .:.ty <>f iMirham. lUl 

I utics, in which < iiici s <1d BOfl Mem t" th.- farm- r 

ItareJ ! 
iDowathi Lit- in this ooonty, • ustom 

!y huch farms us h.iv.- on tli. m lahoi. - The n nt of 

the o 1 part of the wage*. These cottage* in known as "'iin 1 ' li'iieai. " 

laboorM of certain !• I ici-H, un.hr a con- 

tract called "bondage," which, amongut othi the labourer, daring the 

: r « . I • e, any hisdanghtej rapplyhie 

'I 'hi- hihutm-r himself is i '* I on.Uman jp here I 

aNii shown bow individual consumption by the lal .comes coimumption «>u !>«• 

or productive oonenmption from <p. i !• li 

< arioui t«> oh-, the penpiii 

th* ealculatniK' lor.I . . . an.lt rill allow i*t nt tli.' 

i iiooo", aii.l will rnthtr k> v " tlian 

bato any part «»f his ... : • h, K« |m>i t \ 1 1 . 1SS4, |». i 

will not •. with r. »p. ct to th. . hihlrrn, Ac, even 

dity of a v »4ih' disappears 

an w+K' aad wagi 

banaoaesary oaaditioi Lonoe of th. ..th. i 



592 Capitalist Production. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

CONVERSION OF SURPLUS- VALUE INTO CAPITAL. 

SECTION I. — CAPITALIST PRODUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING 
SCALE. TRANSITION OF THE LAWS OF PROPERTY THAT CHARACTERISE 
PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES INTO LAWS OF CAPITALIST APPROPRIATION. 

Hitherto we have investigated Low surplus- value emanates 
from capital ; we have now to see how capital arises from 
surplus-value. Employing surplus-value as capital, reconver- 
ting it into capital, is called accumulation of capital. 1 

First let us consider this transaction from the standpoint of 
the individual capitalist. Suppose a spinner to have advanced 
a capital of £10,000, of which four-fifths (£8000) are laid out 
in cotton, machinery, &c, and one-fifth (£2000) in wages. Let 
him produce 240,000 lbs. of yarn annually, having a value 
of £12,000. The rate of surplus- value being 100//, the surplus- 
value lies in the surplus or net product of 40,000 lbs. of yarn, 
one sixth of the gross product, with a value of £2000 which 
will be realised by a sale. £2000 is £2000. We can neither 
see nor smell in this sum of money a trace of surplus-value. 
When we know that a given value is surplus- value, we know 
how its owner came by it ; but that does not alter the nature 
either of value or of money. 

In order to convert this additional sum of £2000 into capital, 
the master spinner will, all circumstances remaining as before,, 
advance four-fifths of it (£1600) in the purchase of cotton, &C.,. 
and one-rifth (£400) in the purchase of additional spinners, who 
will rind in the market the necessaries of life whose value the 
master has advanced to them. Then the new capital of £2000 

into existence. Does an operative in a cotton-factory produce nothing but cotton 
goods ? No, he produces capital. He produces values that give fresh command over 
his labour, and that, by means of such command, create fresh values." (Karl Marx : 
Lohnarbeit und Kapital, in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 266, 7th April 1849.) 
The articles published under the above title in the N. Rh. Z. are parts of some 
lectures given by me on that subject, in 1847, in the German " Arbeiter-Verein " at 
Brussels, the publication of which was interrupted by the revolution of February. 

1 "Accumulation of capital ; the employment of a portion of revenue as capital. " 
(Mai thus : Definitions &c, ed. Cazenove p. 11.) " Conversion of revenue into capi- 
tal." (Malthus : Princ. of Pol. Econ., 2nd Ed., Lond., 1836, p. 319.) 



Conversion of Surplus- 1 alue into Capital. 

functions in the spinning mill, and brings in, in its torn, a 
surplus-value of £ WO. 

The capital-value wa finally advanced in the moi 
form. The Burplus-value on the contrary inally, the 

value of a definite portion of the product, IftbJ 

product i Id, converted into money, the capital-value 

as its original form. From this moment the capital- 
value and the surplus-valne are both of them Bums of i 
aii«l their reconversion into capita] takes place in pi 
the same way. Th well as the other, is laid out 

by the capitalist in the purchase of commodities that place 
him in a position to begin afresh the fabrication of bis 
and thi- time, on an I scale. But in order able 

to buj tb commodities, he must find them in the 

iiiai b 
Bis own yarn cL only 1 be brings bis annual 

i market, a- all other capitalists Likewise do with 
their coiiunoilitie IJu unmodities, before comin 

pai t of 1 1 ral annual product, pai I of the 

I mass of obj every kind, into which the Bum of the 

individual capitals, Le,, tfa I capital • . bad I 

ad in I of th id of which each capi- 

I .'1 in band only an aliquot part I 

the m Bfectuate onlj interchan the individual 

aomp >n< qI of this """»! pn iduct . U i th( no from 

ber, Inn can neither augment the total i 
luction the nature of the produ< 

1 annual product, 

dap own composition, but in n 

upon circulat 

The annual product ion i d the first \ 

I n ..in whic i ial com] 

apital, Dp in \ ear, li 

I 'I. I ) tln-M- tin mains I orplus- 

luct, iii w liicli tin- »iirplii 

. . • 

rants and desires of I lss, thi 



594 Capitalist Prodttction. 

capitalists ? Were that the case, the cup of surplus- value 
would be drained to the very dregs, and nothing but simple 
reproduction would ever take place. 

To accumulate it is necessary to convert a portion of the 
surplus-product into capital. But we cannot, except by a 
miracle, convert into capital anything but such articles as can 
be employed in the labour-process {i.e., means of production), 
and such further articles as are suitable for the sustenance of 
the labourer, {i.e., means of subsistence.) Consequently, a part 
of the annual surplus-labour must have been applied to the 
production of additional means of production and subsistence, 
over and above the quantity of these things required to replace 
the capital advanced. In one word, surplus-value is conver- 
tible into capital solely because the surplus-product, whose 
value it is, already comprises the material elements of new 
capital. 1 

Now in order to allow of these elements actually functioning 
as capital, the capitalist class requires additional labour. If 
the exploitation of the labourers already employed do not in- 
crease, either extensively or intensively, then additional labour- 
power must be found. For this the mechanism of capitalist 
production provides beforehand, by converting the working 
class into a class dependent on wages, a class whose ordinary 
wages suffice, not only for its maintenance, but for its increase. 
It is only necessary for capital to incorporate this additional 
labour-power, annually supplied by the working class in the 
shape of labourers of all ages, with the surplus means of pro- 
duction comprised in the annual produce, and the conversion 
of surplus-value into capital is complete. From a concrete 
point of view, accumulation resolves itself into the re- 
production of capital on a progressively increasing scale. 
The circle in which simple reproduction moves, alters its 



1 We here take no account of export trade, by means of which a nation can change 
articles of luxury either into means of production or means of subsistence, and vice 
versa. In order to examine the object of our investigation in its integrity, free from 
all disturbing subsidiary circumst rices, we must treat the whole world as one nation, 
and assume that capitalist \ roduotion is everywhere established and has possessed 
itself of every branch of industry. 



Conversion of Sitrplus- Vahie into Capital. 

form, and, to nse Sismondi's expression, cfaan Into ■ 
q iraL 1 

Let us now return to our illustration. It ifl the old story ; 
Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, and so on. The inal 
capital of £10,000 brings in a .surplus-value of £2000, which is 
capitalised. The new capital of £2000 brings in a surplus- 
value of £400, and this, too, is capitalised, converted Inl 
>nd additional capital, which, in its turn, produ further 

. <>. And so the hall rolls on. 

We here leave out of consideration the p trtion of the sur- 

plns-value consumed by the capitalist Just as little does it 

rn II-, for the moment, whether the additional capital is 

joined on to the original capital, <>r is leparated from it t i 

function independently; whether the -am'- capitalist, who 

imulated it, employs it, or whether hi- hands it <>\< r I i 

another. This only we must not forget, that by the sid< 

rly-formed capital, the original capital couth, i re- 

n 1 to produce inrplus-value, and that thi 
f all accumulated capital, and the additional capital 
idered by it. 
The original capital m us 1 by the advance of £1 

II .v did the owner liceoinc po 1 of it \ ■ [)y hi- own 

ii- and thai of his forefathers," answer unanimously the 
•poke men of political economy. 1 And, in fact, their sup] 

appears the only one con I with the law- of the pro- 

duction of commodil 

I; it it i .(lit. ..thiTwi-e with regard to the additional 
tal "f £2000 II. w that originated we know ctly 

'I'h' in <>t' i< - value that <i 

1 lab >ur. The d 

with which the aoMiti" rial .is well 

it h winch t he lal s are su itain 

iponenl parts -»t the surplus pi the 

tribute annually exi laas by the capi- 

irnoii.h '■ an&lyiii <>f Stnr 

- mi rxt.-nt, with *<• " oonvctaion of rrvrnn 

capital," without fathomii 

travail primitif au«j .«1 aoo oapilal a dft am nataianoc." Sianv 

1W. I I . ; : 



596 Capitalist Prodtcction. 

talist class. Though the latter with a portion of that tribute 
purchases the additional labour-power even at its full price, so 
that equivalent is exchanged for equivalent, yet the transac- 
tion is for all that only the old dodge of every conqueror who 
buys commodities from the conquered with the money he 
has robbed them of. 

If the additional capital employs the person who produced 
it, this producer must not only continue to augment the value 
of the original capital, but must buy back the fruits of his 
previous labour with more labour than they cost. When 
viewed as a transaction between the capitalist class and the 
working class, it makes no difference that additional labourers 
are employed by means of the unpaid labour of the previously 
employed labourers. The capitalist may even convert the 
additional capital into a machine that throws the producers of 
that capital out of work, and that replaces them by a few 
children. In every case the working class creates by the surplus- 
labour of one year the capital destined to employ additional 
labour in the following year. 1 And this is what is called ; 
creating capital out of capital. 

The accumulation of the first additional capital of £2000 
presupposes a value of £10,000 belonging to the capitalist by 
virtue of his " primitive labour," and advanced by him. The 
second additional capital of £400 presupposes, on the con- 
trary, only the previous accumulation of the £2000, of which 
the £400 is the surplus- value capitalised. The ownership of past 
unpaid labour is thenceforth the sole condition for the appro- 
priation of living unpaid labour on a constantly increasing 
scale. The more the capitalist has accumulated, the more is he 
able to accumulate. 

In so far as the surplus-value, of which the additional 
capital, No. 1, consists, is the result of the purchase of labour- 
power with part of the original capital, a purchase that con- 
formed to the laws of the exchange of commodities, and that, 
from a legal stand-point, presupposes nothing beyond the free 
disposal, on the part of the labourer, of his own capacities, and 

1 "Labour creates capital before capital employs labour." E. G. Wakefield, Eng- 
land and America. Lond., 1833, Vol. II., p. 110 



Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital, 

part of the owner of mono}- or commodities, of the values 
that belong to him ; insofar as the additional capital, N >. l\ 

the mere result of No 1, and, then oaeqn< 

of the above conditions ; in so far afl each single transaction 
invariably conforms to the laws of the exchan commodi- 

ties, the capitalist baying labour-power, the labourer Belling it, 
we will assume at it- real value; insofar aa all this is 
evident that the laws of appropriation or of private 
property, laws that i ad on the production and circula- 

tnmoditi come by their own inner and inexorable 
dialectic changed into their very opposite. 1 The exchange of 
equivalent original operation with which we started, has 

now become turned round in such a way that there is only an 
appi This i> owing to the fact, first, that the 

capital which <1 for labour-power is itself hut a 

the product of others 1 labour appropriated without 
an equivalent ; and Uy, that this capital must nut only 

I 1 by it- producer, hut replaced together with an 

added surplus The relation subsisting bet* 

capitalist and Labour r becomes a mere semblance appertaining 

to tin* i>iu«-.-ss of circulation, a mere form, foreign t<» the I 
ire of the transaction, and only mystifying it. The< 

purchase ami sale of lahoiii risnowthei I rin : 

what real!;. this— the capitalist again and 

appropriates, without equivalent, a portion of the previously 
materialised labour of .,th il exchanges it for a 

\ I property 

•n a man'i own labour. At l< 

sonic such as.Minipt -:iry since only commodity 

with equal right* confronted each other, ami t ; 

i a hich a man coiiM !»••< >••-! of t ; mo- 

Jit 1 was by ali< qj I ■ immodi and 

«t as at a i.'ivrn at**; develops lotkm ntca— »r,ly 

!«•*• * into ea 

products take the gone ml an«l pre-! 

jM-rty that orrlia»r<| nnoomm<> MHUlly 

'. thrr< f. <tonUb«^l 

«Uo p r opoty by enforcing 
ternal law* of property that are ba* 



59 8 Capitalist Production. 

these could be replaced by labour alone. Now, however, pro- 
perty turns out to be the right, on the part of the capitalist,, 
to appropriate the unpaid labour of others or its product, and 
to be the impossibility, on the part of the labourer, of appropri- 
ating his own product. The separation of property from 
labour has become the necessary consequence of a law that 
apparently originated in their identity. 1 

We have seen that even in the case of simple reproduction,, 
all capital, whatever its original source, becomes converted into 
accumulated capital, capitalised surplus-value. But in the 
flood of production all the capital originally advanced becomes 
a vanishing quantity (magnitude* evanescens, in the mathema- 
tical sense), compared with the directly accumulated capital, 
i.e., with the surplus-value or surplus-product that is recon- 
verted into capital, whether it function in the hands of 
its accumulator, or in those of others. Hence, political 
economy describes capital in general as " accumulated wealth "* 
(converted surplus-value or revenue), " that is employed over 
again in the production of surplus-value," 2 and the capitalist 
as "the owner of surplus- value." 3 It is merely another way 
of expressing the same thing to say that all existing capital is 
accumulated or capitalised interest, for interest is a mere 
fragment of surplus- value. 4 

SECTION 2. — ERRONEOUS CONCEPTION BY POLITICAL ECONOMY OP REPRO- 
DUCTION ON A PROGRESSIVELY INCREASING SCALE. 

Before we further investigate accumulation or the reconver- 

1 The property of the capitalist in the product of the labour of others " is a strict 
consequence of the law of appropriation, the fundamental principle of which was, on 
the contrary, the exclusive title of every labourer to the product of his own labour." 
(Cherbuliez, Riche ou Pauvre. Paris, 1841, p. 58, where, however, the dialectical 
reversal is not properly developed. ) 

2 "Capital, viz., accumulated wealth employed with a view to profit." (Malthus, 
1. c.) " Capital .... consists of wealth saved from revenue, and used with a view 
to profit." (R. Jones : An Introductory Lecture on Polit. Econ., Lond., 1833, p. 
16.) 

3 " The possessors of surplus produce or capital." (The Source and Remedy of the 
National Difficulties. A Letter to Lord John Russell. Lond., 1821.) 

4 " Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, is so all 
engrossing that all the wealth in the world from which income is derived, has long 
ago become the interest on capital." {London Economist, 19th July, 1859.) 



Conversion of Surplus- Value iuto Capital. 599 

.sion of surplus-value into capital, we must brush on one 
an ambiguity introduced by the classical eoonomi 

Just as little as the commodities that the capitalist 1 
with a part of the surplus-value for his own consumpl 
he purpose of production and of creation of vain 
little is the labour that he bays for the satisfaction of his 
natural and Bocial requirements, productive labour. Instead of 
converting surplus-value into capital, he, on the coi by 

the purchase of those commodities and that labour, 
or expends it as revenue. In the face of thu habitual mod 
life of the old feudal nobility, which, ai Hegel rightly s 

uning what is in hand," and m ally 

displays itself in the luxury of persona] retainers, it n 
tremely important for bourgi >my to promulgate the 

pine thai accumulation of capital Is the first duty of ei 
citizen, and to preach without ceasing, thata man cannotaccumu- 
if he eats up all hi Que, instead of spending a good 

of it in the acquisition of additional productive laboui 
who bring in more than they cost I >n the other hand the 
had to contend against the popular prejudice, that 
eonf ipitalist production with boarding, 1 and Eanci 

accumulated wealth is either wealth that if ed from being 

existing form, i m being consumed, 

Etltfa thai is withdrawn from circulation Exclusion of 
money from circulation would also exclude ab 

capil I, while accumulation hoard in the 

umoditi»\s would In* sh< | >mfool< 

aocumulai i »nini<i<liti< 1 * i 1 1 1 . • i - 

of overproduction or of a sti.ppri^.- of cirrulati<'U. It is true 
that the popular mind i> impi- >■••! l»y tl. it, on the one 

1 .. . 

fttnl btyood thil coiitrnctcil do HMO 

I national wealth can well I"- Imiflni I, but I :n a 

> • .'. 

<t*noo, Balxac, wl My itodied cvn\ 

■ 

* "Accir 1 • • t 



600 Capitalist Production, 

hand, of the mass of goods that are stored up for gradual con- 
sumption by the rich, 1 and on the other hand, by the formation 
of reserve stocks ; the latter, a phenomenon that is common to 
all modes of production, and on which we shall dwell for a 
moment, when we come to analyse circulation. Classical 
economy is therefore quite right, when it maintains that the 
consumption of surplus-products by productive, instead of by 
unproductive labourers, is a characteristic feature of the process 
of accumulation. But at this point the mistakes also begin. 
Adam Smith has made it the fashion, to represent accumulation 
as nothing more than consumption of surplus-products by 
productive labourers, which amounts to saying, that the 
capitalising of surplus-value consists in merely turning 
surplus-value into labour-power. Let us see what Ricardo 
e.g., says : " It must be understood that all the pro- 
ductions of a country are consumed ; but it makes the 
greatest difference imaginable whether they are consumed by 
those who reproduce, or by those who do not reproduce another 
value. When we say that revenue is saved, and added to 
capital, what we mean is, that the portion of revenue, so said 
to be added to capital, is consumed by productive instead of 
unproductive labourers. There can be no greater error than 
in supposing that capital is increased by non-consumption." 2 
There can be no greater error than that which Ricardo and all 
subsequent economists repeat after A. Smith, viz., that " the 
part of revenue, of which it is said, it has been added to 
capital, is consumed by productive labourers." According to 
this, all surplus-value that is changed into capital becomes 
variable capital. So far from this being the case, the surplus- 
value, like the original capital, divides itself into constant 
capital and variable capital, into means of production and 
labour-power. Labour-power is the form under which variable 
capital exists during the process of production. In this process 
the labour-power is itself consumed by the capitalist while the 

1 In this sense Necker speaks of the " objets de faste et de somptuosite," of which 
"le temps a grossi l'accumulation," and which "les lois de propriete ont rassembles 
dans une seule classe de la societe." (Oeuvres de M. Necker, Paris and Lausanne, 
1780, t. ii. p. 291.) 

2 Ricardo, 1. c, p. 1G3, note. 






Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital. 60 1 

means of production are consumed by the labour-power in the 

of its function, labour. At the saint.- time, the m< 
paid for the purchase of the labour-power, La converted into 
ries, that are consumed, not by "productive labour," bat 
by the "productive labourer." A Smith, by a fundamentally 
perverted analysis, arrives at the absurd conclusion, that even 
though each individual capital is divided into a constant and 
a variable part, the capital oi Ives itself only into 

variable capital, u ., is laid out exclusively in payment of wa 
For instance, suppose a cloth manufacturer convert DO into 

capital. One portion he lays out in buyin ther 

in woollen yarn, machinery, &c Bnt the people, from whom 
the yarn and the machinery, pay for labour with a 
part of the purchase money, and Boon until the whole 62000 
are spent in the payment ofwi '-., until the entire product 
represented by the £2000 baa been consumed by productive 
labourers. It i evident that the whol b of t 

o o 

in the words " and which Bend us from pillar to 

[n truth, Adam Smith breaks hia investigation off, just 
where it - difficulties ''--^in. 1 

The annual pn E reproduction is easily undent I, so 

long a we keep bo view merely the Bum total of the year's 
production. Bui every single component ofthia product must 
be brought into the marl nd there the diffi- 

culty begins The movement the individual capitals, and 
of the ] '1 intermingle and are lost in 

the if places, in the circulation of the wealth of 

• t he i ht and propounds very complio 

prol ilution. In the tlnnl part <>f 1 ». .. .k II. I hall 

of tin- real b 
the of t he Pbj crat that in their / 

■ » I tempt t<» depict the annual 



U oven such fault 
thiawl !.i< prtdMMMri, tn it' 

1 <>f the scionc register* with the 

«|offmati«tii of 
raj.iUl lUelf in tic lon| run hi uOOHi •litirrly ws wile 



602 Capitalist Production. 

production in the shape in which it is presented to us after 
passing through the process of circulation. 1 

For the rest, it is a matter of course, that political economy, 
acting in the interests of the capitalist class, has not failed to 
exploit the doctrine of Adam Smith, viz., that the whole of 
that part of the surplus product which is converted into capital,, 
is consumed by the working class. 



SECTION 3. — SEPARATION OF SURPLUS -VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE. 

THE ABSTINENCE THEORY. 

In the last preceding chapter, we treated surplus- value (or the 
surplus product) solely as a fund for supplying the individual 
consumption of the capitalist. In this chapter we have, so far, 
treated it solely as a fund for accumulation. It is, however, 
neither the one nor the other, but is both together. One por- 
tion is consumed by the capitalist as revenue, 2 the other is 
employed as capital, is accumulated. 

Given the mass of surplus-value, then, the larger the one of 
these parts, the smaller is the other. Ceteris paribus, the ratio 
of these parts determines the magnitude of the accumulation. 
But it is by the owner of the surplus-value, by the capitalist 
alone, that the division is made. It is his deliberate act. That 
part of the tribute exacted by him which he accumulates, is 

i In his description of the process of reproduction, and of accumulation, Adam 
Smith, in many ways, not only made no advance, but even lost considerable 
ground, compared with his predecessors, especially the Pbysiocrats. Connected with 
the illusion mentioned in the text, is the really wonderful dogma, left by him as an in- 
heritance to political economy, the dogma, that the price of commodities is made up 
of wages, profit (interest) and rent, i.e., of wages and surplus-value. Starting from 
this basis, Storch naively confesses, " II est impossible de resoudre le prix necessaire 
dans ses elements les plus simples." (Storch, 1. c. Petersb. Edit. 1815, t. i. p. 140, 
note.) A fine science of economy this, which declares it impossible to resolve the 
price of a commodity into its simplest elements ! This point will be further investi- 
gated in the seventh part of Book iii. 

2 The reader will notice, that the word revenue is used in a double sense : first, to desig- 
nate surplus-value so far as it is the fruit periodically yielded by capital ; secondly, 
fco designate the part of that fruit which is periodically consumed by the capitalist, 
or added to the fund that supplies his private consumption. I have retained this 
double meaning because it harmonises with the language of the English and French 
economists. 



Conversio7i of Surplus-Value into Capital. 60 



o 



.^aid to bo saved by him, because he does nut eat it. 

rase he performs the function of a capitalist, and enriches 
himself. 

Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no bistori 
value, and no light to that historical existence, which, to 
10 expression of the witty Lichnowsky, u hasn't 
And bo far only is the necessity for his own transitory 
implied in the transitory necessity for tin- capitalist 
mode "t" production. But, so tar as he Lb personif pital, it 
ii nut values in use and the enjoyment of them, but exchaii 
value and its augmentation, that spur him int. action. Fan- 
atically bent "ii making value expand Itself, he ruthl. 

the human race I 1 produce for production*! ; he 

thus forces tic- development <>i the productive powers of 
and 1 those mat-rial conditions, which alone can form 

the real basis of a higher form of in which 

the lull and free development of every individual forms the 
ruling principle. Only as personified capital is the capitalist 

tble. A u<-h, he shares with the miser t; 
for wealth as wealth. But that which in the miser is a mere 
idioe in the capitalist, the effect of tl 

banism, of which he is but one of the wheel . M 1 >ver 
the development of capitalist production makes it 1 atly 

wiry to keep incj. ,t in_r the amount "f the capital laid 

oul in a given industrial undertaking, and competition ma 

tli.' immanent bw 1 1 capital] I taction I 1 be fell bj 

individual capii rnal coercive laws. It compels 

him 1 1 keep c »n itantly ipital, in order I 

i.Mt 1 ctend it !»•• cani, apt by means of 1 1 
ive ■ ^cumulation. 

his m 1 ■ funel ital 

pita] i ^, in li ii, wit 

a will his own pi bb ry p< 1 

uunilati«.n, ju -t M in ible 

entry, the private expenditi placed 

.-ii tic d.'ht his 1 

Do accumulate, ial wealth 

, human b lim, and thus 



604 Capitalist P 7'oduction. 

to extend both the direct and the indirect sway of the 
capitalist. 1 

But original sin is at work everywhere. As capitalist pro- 
duction, accumulation, and wealth, become developed, the 
capitalist ceases to be the mere incarnation of capital. He has 
a fellow-feeling for his own Adam, and his education gradually 
enables him to smile at the rage for asceticism, as a mere 
prejudice of the old-fashioned miser. While the capitalist of 
the classical type brands individual consumption as a sin 
against his function, and as " abstinence " from accumulating, 
the modernised capitalist is capable of looking upon accumula- 
tion as " abstinence " from pleasure. 

" Two souls, alas, do dwell within his breast ; 
The one is ever parting from the other. " 2 

1 Taking the usurer, that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of the capitalist 
for his text, Luther shows very aptly that the love of power is an element in the 
desire to get rich. " The heathen were able, by the light of reason, to conclude that 
a usurer is a double-dyed thief and murderer. We Christians, however, hold them in 
such honour, that we fairly worship them for the sake of their money . . . Whoever eats 
up, robs, and steals the nourishment of another, that man commits as great a murder 
(so far as in him lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Such does a 
usurer, and sits the while safe on his stool, when he ought rather to be hanging on 
the gallows, and be eaten by as many ravens as he has stolen guilders, if only there 
were so much flesh on him, that so many ravens could stick their beaks in and share 
it. Meanwhile, we hang the small thieves . . . Little thieves are put in the stocks, 
great thieves go flaunting in gold and silk . . . Therefore is there, on this earth, no 
greater enemy of man (after the devil) than a gripe-money, and usurer, for he wants 
to be God over all men. Turks, soldiers, and tyrants are also bad men, yet must 
they let the people live, and confess that they are bad, and enemies, and do, 
nay, must, now and then show pity to some. But a usurer and money-glutton, 
such a one would have the whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and 
want, so far as in him lies, so that he may have all to himself, and every one 
may receive from him as from a God, and be his serf for ever. To wear fine cloaks, 
golden chains, rings, to wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, 
pious man . . . Usury is a great huge monster, like a were-wolf , who lays waste all, 
more than any Cacus, Gerion or Antus. And yet decks himself out, and would be 
thought pious, so that people may not see where the oxen have gone, that he drags 
backwards into his den. But Hercules shall hear the cry of the oxen and of his prisoners, 
and shall seek Cacus even in cliffs and among rocks, and shall set the oxen loose 
again from the villain. For Cacus means the villain that is a pious usurer, and 
steals, robs, eats everything. And will not own that he has done it, and thinks no 
one will find him out, because the oxen, drawn backwards into his den, make it 
seem, from their foot-prints, that they have been let out. So the usurer would de- 
ceive the world, as though he were of use and gave the world oxen, which he, how- 
ever, rends, and eats all alone . . . And since we break on the wheel, and behead 
highwaymen, murderers and housebreakers, how much more ought we to break on 
the wheel and kill, . . . hunt down, curse and behead all usurers." (Martin Luther, 1. c.) 

2 See Goethe's Faust. 



Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital. 605 

At the historical dawn of capitalist production, — and 
capitalist upstart has per onallj 1 through this hi 

ftta<,'e — avarice, and desire to get rich, are the ruling 
But the pi* _ . • : capitalist production not onlyci 
of delights; it lays open, in speculation and ti. tem, 

a thou and 1 uro of sudden enrichment When a certain 

eof development has been reached, a conventional deg 
1 ligality, which is also an exhibition of wealth, and c 
quently a source of credit, becomes a busin the 

"unfortunate * capitalist Luxury enters into capital 
ofrepre entation. Moreover, the capitalist g ih, not like the 

mi er, in proportion to hie personal labour and restricted con- 
sumption, but at the same rate as he out the labour- 
power of others, and enforces on the lal abstinence from 
all life's enjoyments. Although, therefore, the prodigalit; 
the capitalist never p the bona-fide character of the 
open-handed feudal lord's prodigality, but, on the contr 
always lurking behind it the n rdidavari 1 the d 
anxi .-ulation, yet his expenditure \sith bis accum- 
ulation, without the 0816 n LTj f8 blicting the other. 

Dm along with this growth, there is at the same time devel< 
in hi breast a Faustian conflici 

mnilat ion, and the t )l Bnjoj im-nt. 

I '1 Ail. 11, in a work published in 1 7 The tn 

M divided into four p First, n hen 

; ofactu] obliged t" work h-ud t'..i their livelih 

They em iehed thiMiisrlves rhietly bing the patent-, w :. 

children bound as appn-nti<-e> to tln-m : the parent 

a high pi- -111 i 11 111 . while the appreiiti < >n 

hand, tb low, and t" accuintll 

tnony wai requi ite Th( ) lived lik 

on Lhi ital. 

1 ee..nd :i they had begun t«» acquire little 

i . as hai I ' <"" 

ista lal ii i\- 1 K 1 1 on and 

in as plain a 111. urn. 1 ie. . Did third 

1 \ I" _- .- 1 r 1 . and t i 

I t ie l\ 



606 Capitalist Production. 

It is probable that few or no capitals of £3000 to £4000 ac- 
quired by trade existed here before 1690. However, about 
that time, or a little later, the traders had got money before- 
hand, and began to build modern brick houses, instead of those 
of wood and plaster." Even in the early part of the 18th 
century, a Manchester manufacturer, who placed a pint of 
foreign wine before his guests, exposed himself to the remarks 
and headshakings of all his neighbours. Before the rise of 
machinery, a manufacturer's evening expenditure at the public- 
house where they all met, never exceeded sixpence for a glass 
of punch, and a penny for a screw of tobacco. It was not till 
1758, and this marks an epoch, that a person actually engaged 
in business was seen with an equipage of his own. " The 
fourth period," the last 30 years of the 18th century, " is that in 
which expense and luxury have made great progress, and was 
supported by a trade extended by means of riders and factors 
through every part of Europe." 1 What would the good Dr. 
Aikin say if he could rise from his grave and see the Manchester 
of to-day ? 

Accumulate, accumulate ! That is Moses and the prophets ! 
" Industry furnishes the material which saving accumulates." 2 
Therefore, save, save, i.e., reconvert the greatest possible portion 
of surplus-value, or surplus-product into capital ! Accumulation 
for accumulation's sake, production for production's sake : by 
this formula classical economy expressed the historical mission 
of the bourgeoisie, and did not for a single instant deceive itself 
over the birth-throes of wealth. 3 But what avails lamentation 
in the face of historical necessity ? If to classical economy, 
the proletarian is but a machine for the production of surplus- 
value ; on the other hand, the capitalist is in its eyes only a 
machine for the conversion of this surpius-value into additional 



1 Dr. Aikin : Description of the country from 30 to 40 miles round Manchester. 
Lond., 1795, p. 182, sqq. 

2 A. Smith : 1. c, bk. iii., ch. iii. 

3 Even J. B. Say says : " Les epargnes des riches se font aux depens des pauvres." 

*' The Koman proletarian lived almost entirely at the expense of society 

It can almost be said that modern society lives at the expense of the proletarians, on 
what it keeps out of the remuneration of labour." (Sismondi : Etudes, &c, t. i., 
p. 24.) 



Conversion of Surphis- Value into Capital. 607 

'.tal. Political economy takes the hi I function of the 

capitalist in hitter earnest. In order fco charm out of his bo 
the awful conflict between the desire for enjoymenl and 
ehaee after ri Ifalthus, about the year 1820, advocate I a 

division of labour, which assigns to the capitalist actually en- 
'1 in production, the business of accumulating, and to the 
other Bharers in Burplus-value, to the landlords, the place-men, 
the ben . fee, the bush f spending. It is of the 

highest impori keep separate the passion for 

enditure and the passion for accumulation." J Th • capital- 
having long been '_ ri ><"l liven and men of the world, utfc 
loud cries. What, exclaimed one of their spokesmen, a disciple 
ofRicardo, Mr. Maltha ihes high rents, heavy taxes, fee., 

thai the pressure of the -pur may bantlybe kept on 
the industrious by onproductive consumers] By all me 

]. production on a constantly increasing scale, runs 
tip- shibboleth ; hut " production will, by inch a process, be far 
more curbed in than spurred on. Nor is it quite fair thus to 

maintain in hllcncss a nun»h<r of pcr^-ns only to pinch oth 

who are likely, from their charac tethem to 

work, t" work with snri I 'nfair as he finds it to spur <>n 

the indu trial capital] t, by depriving his bread of itsbui 

he think i-»ary to rehire the Labourer's wages to a 

minimum rt to keep him industrio he for a 

moment al the fa»-t, that the appropriati unpaid 

ir 1 the lurplu ' Increased iftnand on 

the if the labourers d nothing more than their 

will i. •-- «.f tlii-ir nwn product f«>r thniiM'lves, 

and leave s •: ■ mplq] nd it* if 

nsuinption " (on the 

the laJ 1 can only reply thai glni Ki Bynony- 

. ith Lai ." * 

Th disputation, how the booty pumped out of the 

labour* -r may be divided, with most 1 unmlation, 

<>n th- in«lu trial capitali I and the rich i«ll«T, was husli«'«l 

MtHlnH, 1 

1 1. 1 



608 Capitalist Production. 

in face of the revolution of July. Shortly afterwards, the 
town proletariat at Lyons sounded the tocsin of revolution, 
and the country proletariat in England began to set fire to 
farmyards and cornstacks. On this side of the Channel Owen- 
ism began to spread ; on the other side, St. Simonism and 
Fourierism. The hour of vulgar economy had struck. Exactly 
a year before Nassau W. Senior discovered at Manchester, 
that the profit (including interest) of capital is the product of 
the last hour of the twelve, he had announced to the world 
another discovery. " I substitute," he proudly says, " for the 
word capital, considered as an instrument of production, the 
word abstinence." x An unparalleled sample this, of the discover- 
ies of vulgar economy ! It substitutes for an economic category, 
a sycophantic phrase — voila tout. " When the savage," says 
Senior, " makes bows, he exercises an industry, but he does not 
practise abstinence." This explains how and why, in the 
earlier states of society, the implements of labour were fabri- 
cated without abstinence on the part of the capitalist. " The 
more society progresses, the more abstinence is demanded," 2 
namely, from those who ply the industry of appropriating 
the fruits of others' industry. All the conditions for carrying 
on the labour-process are suddenly converted into so many acts 
of abstinence on the part of the capitalist. If the corn is not 
all eaten, but part of it also sown — abstinence of the capitalist. 
If the wine gets time to mature — abstinence of the capitalist. 3 

1 (Senior, Principes fondamentaux de l'Econ. Pol. trad. Arrivabeue. Paris, 1836, 
p. 308). This was rather too much for the adherents of the old classical school. 
"Mr. Senior has substituted for it " (the expression, labour and profit) " the expres- 
sion Labour and Abstinence. He who converts his revenue abstains from the 
enjoyment which its expenditure would afford him. It is not the capital, but the 
use of the capital productively, which is the cause of profits." (John Cazenove, 1. c. 
p. 130, Note.) John St. Mill, on the contrary, accepts on the one hand Kicardo's 
theory of profit, and annexes on the other hand Senior's "remuneration of abstin- 
ence." He is as much at home in absurd contradictions, as he feels at sea in the 
Hegelian contradiction, the source of all dialectic. It has never occurred to the 
vulgar economist to make the simple reflexion, that every human action may be 
viewed, as "abstinence" from its opposite. Eating is abstinence from fasting, walk- 
ing, abstinence from standing still, working, abstinence from idling, idling, abstinence 
from working, &c. These gentlemen would do well, to ponder, once in a way, over 
Spinoza's : " Determinatio est Negatio." 

2 Senior, 1. c. p. 342. 

3 " No one . . . will sow his wheat, for instance, and allow it to remain a twelve- 



Conversion of Sin-plus- Value into Capital. 609 

The capitalist robe his own self) whenever [!) the 

instruments of production to the labourer,* 1 that is, w b r by 

irporating labour-power with them, be uses them ( - 
surplus-value out of that labour-power, instead of eatin 
op, steam- otton, railways, manure, fa md all . 

tnomist childishly puts it, instead of dissipat- 
ing "their value" in luxuries and other articles of consump- 
tion. 1 Howl as a class ace to perform that I 
Ksret that vulgar economy has hitherto obstinal 
> divulge. Enough, thai the world still j >lely 
through the self-chastisement of this modern penitent of 
Vishnu, the capitalist. Not only accumulation, bi umple 

1 constant effort to 1 
the temptation of consuming i( The simple dictates 
humanity tin 1 plainly enjoin ti. of the capitalist 

from this martj rdom and temptation, in the same way that the 
M dave-owner whs lately delivered, by the abolition of 
.from the painful dilemma, wheth iquander the 

surplus-pro luci lashed out of bis 1 in cbam- 

;' it, into ni' u 
land 
in economic forms of societ the most different kinds, 

then aly simple reproduction, but, In i 

product v »n on <-i pi . \ ely increasing seal 

i-l moi '. : 

■ product - li. into m taction. 

-, liuv. nut present it lelf umulat 

1 long a> the 
luci ; ii, and with them, !ii> product 

r If are I 
U»«m- l :. m he ex 

I l \ ••iW. 1-11. |- l.-.i 

' " Li i-rivntion qve itapOM 
I 

* 

klitta 1< ii'l money) ec» 
en li> rcr U valrur a eoa pru|»re u**f< . 

•ti.Unt p«>ur t. «;»'.• r 4 U 

- S» 



610 Capitalist Production. 

means of subsistence, do not confront him in the shape of 
capital. 1 Richard Jones, who died a few years ago, and was 
the successor of Malthus in the chair of political economy at 
Haileyburj' College, discusses this point well in the light of 
two important facts. Since the great mass of the Hindoo 
population are peasants cultivating their land themselves, 
their products, their instruments of labour and means of sub- 
sistence never take " the shape of a fund saved from revenue, 
which fund has, therefore, gone through a previous process of 
accumulation." 2 On the other hand, the non-agricultural 
labourers in those provinces where the English rule has least 
disturbed the old system, are directly employed by the mag- 
nates, to whom a portion of the agricultural surplus-product is 
rendered in the shape of tribute or rent. One portion of this 
product is consumed by the magnates in kind, another is con- 
verted, for their use, by the labourers, into articles of luxury 
and such like things ; while the rest forms the wages of the 
labourers, who own their implements of labour. Here, pro- 
duction and reproduction on a progressively increasing scale, 
go on their way without any intervention from that queer 
saint, that knight of the woeful countenance, the capitalist 
" abstainer." 



SECTION 4. — CIRCUMSTANCES THAT, INDEPENDENTLY OF THE PROPORTIONAL 
DIVISION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO CAPITAL AND REVENUE, DETERMINE 
THE AMOUNT OF ACCUMULATION. DEGREE OF EXPLOITATION OF 
LABOUR-POWER. PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOUR. GROWING DIFFERENCE 
IN AMOUNT BETWEEN CAPITAL EMPLOYED AND CAPITAL CONSUMED. 
MAGNITUDE OF CAPITAL ADVANCED. 

The proportion in which surplus- value breaks up into 
capital and revenue being given, the magnitude of the capital 
accumulated clearly depends on the absolute magnitude of the 

1 " The particular classes of income which yield the most abundantly to the pro- 
gress of national capital, change at different stages of their progress, and are, there- 
fore, entirely different in nations occupying different positions in that progress . . . 
Profits . . . unimportant source of accumulation, compared with wages and rents, 
in the earlier stages of society . . . When a considerable advance in the powers of 
national industry has actually taken place, profits rise into comparative importance 
as a source of accumulation." (Richard Jones. Textbook, &c, p. 16. 21.) 

2 L c. p. 36. sq. 









Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital. 6 1 i 

surplus-value. Suppose that 80 per cent, were capitalised and 
20 per cent, eaten up, the accumulated capital will be £2,400 
or £1,200, according as the total surplus-value has amoui 
to £8,000 or £1,500. Hence all the circumstances that d< 
mine the mass of surplus-value, operate to determine the 
magnitude of the accumulation. We sum them up once again, 
but only in BO far as they afford new points of view in regard 
to accumulation. 

It will be remembered that the rate of surplus- value depends, 
in the lir-t place, on the degree of exploitation of labour-power. 
Political economy values this fact so highly, that it occasionally 
identifies the acceleration of accumulation due to incn 
productivem sss of labour, with its acceleration due to incn. 
exploitation of the labourer. 1 In the chapter- on the produc- 
tion of surplus-value it was constantly presupposed thai wages 
ire at least equal to the value of labour-power. Forcible 
reduction of wages below this value plays, however, in practice 

feoo important a part, lor us not to pause upon it for a moment 

It, in fact, transforms, within certain limit-, the labour r's 
necessary consumption-fund into a fund for the accumulation 
of capital 

"Wages," says John Stuart Mill, "have no productive 
power; they are the price of a productive-power. Wages do not 
contribute, along with labour, to the production of commodities, 
no more than the price of tools contributes along with the t 

then If labour could be had without pure], 

might be dispensed with," 1 But it' the labourers could live on 

air tie;, could not be DOUghi at any price. The lero "t their 
i tl a limit in a mathematical sense, always 

'"I 'Indiffei I khi u< < uiiiulation of oapital or of tin- 

tmplojring" (£#^ exploiting) "labour U not I, and n 

cases depend un tin 
Ore generally | IB obondoil L' If. in t L 

hi the iroollneoi «'f thai aliqui 
uny pe..iM . t li.tt gooi t" Ihoot whoM BOAual labour pi ', Ihe »« 

nearl\ .!, booMMthoren the fund whence < 

the on rt, be a. 

Obeei 

1 a nuiuo una ■ ' 

Lood . i i 



612 Capitalist Production. 

beyond reach, although we can always approximate more and 
more nearly to it. The constant tendency of capital is to force 
the cost of labour back towards this zero. A writer of the 
18th century, often quoted already, the author of the " Essay 
on Trade and Commerce," only betrays the innermost secret 
soul of English capitalism, when he declares the historic 
mission of England to be the forcing down of English wages to 
the level of the French and the Dutch. 1 With other things he 
says naively : " But if our poor " (technical term for labourers) 
" will live luxuriously .... then labour must, of course, be 
dear When it is considered what luxuries the manufac- 
turing populace consume, such as brandy, gin, tea, sugar, foreign 
fruit, strong beer, printed linens, snuff, tobacco, &c." 2 He quotes 
the work of a Northamptonshire manufacturer, who, with eyes 
squinting heavenward, moans : " Labour is one-third cheaper 
in France than in England ; for their poor work hard, and fare 
hard, as to their food and clothing. Their chief diet is bread, 
fruit, herbs, roots, and dried fish ; for they very seldom eat 
flesh ; and when wheat is dear, they eat very little bread." 3 
" To which may be added," our essayist goes on, " that their 
drink is either water or other small liquors, so that they spend 
very little money .... These things are very difficult to be 
brought about ; but they are not impracticable, since they have 
been effected both in France and in Holland." 4 Twenty years 

lu An Essay on Trade and Commerce, Lond., 1770," p. 44. The "Times" of 
December, 1866, and January, 1867, in like manner published certain outpourings of 
the heart of the English mineowner, in which the happy lot of the Belgian miners 
was pictured, who asked and received no more than was strictly necessary for them 
to live for their " masters." The Belgian labourers have to suffer much, but to figure 
in the " Times " as model labourers ! In the beginning of February, 1867, came the 
answer : strike of the Belgian miners at Marchienne, put down by powder and lead. 

2 1. c.,pp. 44, 46. 

3 The Northamptonshire manufacturer commits a pious fraud, pardonable in one 
whose heart is so full. He nominally compares the life of the English and French 
manufacturing labourer, but in the words just quoted he is painting, as he himself 
confesses in his confused way, the French agricultural labourers. 

4 1. c, p. 70, 71. Note to the 3rd edition : To-day, thanks to the competition on the 
world-market, established since then, we have advanced much further. " If China,''" 
says Mr. Stapleton, M.P., to his constituents, "should become a great manufacturing 
country, I do not see how the manufacturing population of Europe could sustain the 
contest without descending to the level of their competitors." ("Times," Sept. 9, 1873, 
p. 8.) The wished-for goal of English capital is no longer Continental wages but 
Chinese. 



Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital. 61 



J 



r, an American humbugs the bar oi I Yank B Djamin 
Thomson (alius Count Rnmford) followed the 
philanthropy to i iafaetion oi .1 man. 

j " are a c okery book with recei] 
repla c ing by some Bnccedanenm the ordinary dear f 
labourer. The following is a particulary Bncceasfal 
wonderful philosopher: "5 Lba oi barley meal, 7 
of Indian corn, 6Jd« ; 3d. worth oi red herring, Id. I 

>per and iweet herbs, in all 20fd ; m 
men, and at the medium price of barley and of In li m corn 
. . . . this - -up in;: \ be provid I ai ]<1, tl. 2i I 

ounces." 1 With tl. mce of capii ction, 

ado) I d of food render 1 Thoi ideal 

1 of the 1 8th and during tli the 

ntury, the English farmers and landloi 

minimum of wage, by paying tfc altural lal 

than the minimum in the form of wi ad the remainder 

in I : An example of th jish 

y in which the Engli h Dogberri ted in th ir "legal" 

fixi: • aril?: " Tl ' Norfolk had dined, 

• ■, wh< ii ' - ; t he 

of B evidently though! the labourers ou 
i ben ' ; • fixed ( I Speenhamland, 1 7 

. . . . i le thai ' income n eekly) should 

I , Boooomical, an I I pineal, A- 

I - vn beggar IOOJ) lo VorkbtMMWOTOTMWS, ftt.'l reproachfully wan 

laJbotu 

oatmeal ami barley meal, water 

I •< tamo aort at hi: Huh 

i tout mixture* of float baling l>. . ■ i.:.-. 

aVt***** agricultural la . bj Scotland. v*lnro education ii r> : 

i«, probably, ; ' 

■ace- « oooaidered. *am* 

|liab labourer t» i 

1 amontary Commlaaioa OO a<ln' 

■ titfatcaoo, tt will \m teen that the a 

olaatioo in. pure baaed 

01 -Hint* Ufell •''I wrfr «<1 

I y hoatla, what . clay, muiiI, Ac. Several tl.d uut c 

■OOfphia. 



6 14 Capitalist Production. 

for a man," when the gallon or half-peck loaf of 8 lbs. 11 oz. is 
at ls.j and increase regularly till bread is Is. 5d. ; when it is 
above that sum, decrease regularly till it be at 2s., and then 
his food should be ^th less." 1 Before the Committee of Inquiry 
of the House of Lords, 1814, a certain A. Bennett, a large 
farmer, magistrate, poor-law guardian, and wage-regulator, was 
asked : " Has any proportion of the value of daily labour been 
made up to the labourers out of the poors' rate ?" Answer: 
" Yes. it has ; the weekly income of every family is made up to 
the gallon loaf (8 lbs. 11 oz.), and 3d. per head! .... The 
gallon loaf per week is what we suppose sufficient for the 
maintenance of every person in the family for the week ; and 
the 3d. is for clothes, and if the parish think proper to find 
clothes, the 3d. is deducted. This practice goes through all the 
western part of Wiltshire, and, I believe, throughout the 
country." 2 " For years," exclaims a bourgeois author of 
that time, " they (the farmers) have degraded a respectable 
class of their countrymen, by forcing them to have recourse to 
the workhouse .... the farmer, while increasing his own 
gains, has prevented any accumulation on the part of his 
labouring dependants." 3 The part played in our days by the 
direct robbery from the labourer's necessary consumption- 
fund in the formation of surplus- value, and, therefore, of the 
accumulation fund of capital, the so-called domestic industry 
has served to show. (Ch. xv., sect. 8, c.) Further facts on this 
subject will be given later. 

Although in all branches of industry that part of the 
constant capital consisting of instruments of labour must 
be sufficient for a certain number of labourers (determined 
by the magnitude of the undertaking), it by no means 
always necessarily increases in the same proportion as the 
quantity of labour employed. In a factory, suppose that 100 
labourers working 8 hours a day yield 800 working-hours. 

- G. B. Newnham (barrister-at-law) : "A Review of the Evidence before the Com- 
ar.ittee of the twc Houses of Parliament on the Corn Laws. Lond., 1815," p. 28, note. 

-1. c, pp. 19, 20. 

£ C. H. Parry, 1. c, pp. 77, 69. The landlords, on their side, not only "indemnified " 
themselves foi the Anti-jacobin war, which they wnged in the name of England, but 
turiched themselves enormously. Their rents doubled, trebled, quadrupled, "and in 
CLt instance, increased sixfold in eighteen years." (1. c, pp. 100, 101.) 



Conversion of Surplus-Value info Capital. 615 

If the capitalist wishes to raise this sum by one half, he can 
employ 50 more workers; but then he must also advance more 
capital, not merely for waives, hut for instruments of labour, 
lint }i<- might also let the 100 labourer! irork 1- hoon insi 
of 8, and then the instruments of labour already to hand would 

enough. These would then simply be more rapidly 1 
ramed Thus additional labour. 1 n of the greater ten 

of labour-power, can augment surplus-product and surplus- 
vnli, ibject matter of accumulation , without c 1 

ponding augmentation in the mt {.ait <.feaj.it.-tl. 

In the extractive industries, mine . the raw mat. rials 

form no part of the capital advanced. The subject of labour 
i- in tl. ri'. t a product of previoufl labour, but i- farni 

Nature f metals, minerals, coal, stone, 

In t the constant capital consists aim 

exclusively of instruments of labour, which can very p. 

quantity "1" labour -lay and night ^hit*- 
All other things being equal, tie- ma-s ami 
f the product will ri-.- in direct proportion t.. the labour 
nded Aj on the tii- f day of production, tie- original pro- 
duce-formers, now turned in* of the mat 
elements of capital man and N till work 

labour-] ■ domain of 

emulation I nded without any pi aenf 

pital 
In agriculture the land under culti be in. 

without the ;i.lvaner of niu|v .-■ 1 an 1 tnanure I this 

made, the purely mechanical 

^ »il it ielf j . s a ii: • on the am. .tint 

ii I \ '(•■ at.-r q I lab >ur, done by tic same 

mm • labourers as I •- the t'-uti 

with. .u* tiring any new advance in the instrume I 
l • again the m in on N 

> an nun ion, 

with-;' • 

I in what is rail 

[Mjndit 
additional neoeesaril 



616 Capitalist Production. 

instruments of labour. And as extractive industry and agri- 
culture supply manufacturing industry with its raw materials 
and those of its instruments of labour, the additional product 
the former have created without additional advance of capital, 
tells also in favour of the latter. 

General result : by incorporating with itself the two primary 
creators of wealth, labour-power and the land, capital acquires 
a power of expansion that permits it to augment the elements 
of its accumulation beyond the limits apparently fixed by its 
own magnitude, or by the value and the mass of the means of 
production, already produced, in which it has its being. 

Another important factor in the accumulation of capital is 
the degree of productivity of social labour. 

With the productive power of labour increases the mass of 
the products, in which a certain value, and, therefore, a surplus- 
value of a given magnitude, is embodied. The rate of surplus- 
value remaining the same or even falling, so long as it only 
falls more slowly, than the productive power of labour rises, 
the mass of the surplus-product increases. The division of this 
product into revenue and additional capital remaining the 
same, the consumption of the capitalist may, therefore, increase 
without anv decrease in the fund of accumulation. The relative 
magnitude of the accumulation fund may even increase at the 
expense of the consumption fund, whilst the cheapening of 
commodities places at the disposal of the capitalist as many 
means of enjoyment as formerly, or even more than formerly. 
But hand-in-hand with the increasing productivity of labour, 
goes, as we have seen, the cheapening of the labourer, there- 
fore a higher rate of surplus- value, even when the real wages 
are rising. The latter never rise proportionally to the produc- 
tive power of labour. The same value in variable capital there- 
fore sets in movement more labour-power, and, therefore, more 
labour. The same value in constant capital is embodied in 
more means of production, i.e., in more instruments of labour, 
materials of labour and auxiliary materials ; it therefore also 
supplies more elements for the production both of use-value 
and of value, and with these more absorbers of labour. The 
value of the additional capital, therefore, remaining the same 



Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital. ( 

d diminish] \ omulation -till ti 

Not only does the scali taction materiall; 

the production of surplus-value inc Idly tl 

the value of the additional capital 
Ti. at of the productive j 

■ on the n.'il capital already ei d in < 
[action. A part of the functioning apital 

of instruments of lab >ur, such as macbi 
• • I, or i 

. ind, until aft< ime, 

part of these instruments of labour ] 
the limit of its pr Kiuctive function It n 
, in thai year, the time for it- periodical reproduction 
meat by new ones of ti..' same kind. If the . 
ductivenesa of labour has, during tip- using up of tin tru- 

ments of labour, in- I [and it develop itinually with 

the uninterrupted b i technology , d 

effi< their increased efficiency), i 

iiiacliin >K apparata & . replace the old. The old 

capital o m «e productive form, apart from 

the i il improvement - in th< 

already in use The other j ■ • pital, i 

I and auxiliary »u tantly reproduced in 

less than . . tll'iS'i j)!«).lMr.«l 1,, 

annual!^ introduction of imj metli 
thei ■ unroll ly ou I 

on thai i in t lh< i not 

only multiplies the number ol n<l the 

appl if those already known, ti ling with the 

a th '»t' It teache 

how to throw tb< tin- pr< •«•• 

and con iimpl ion I n inl the cii the 

an i t th'-ut any pi 

ipital, oieate I. • 

expl wealth by Tease in the 

J ft 

DO*' ll«|f|M'Hl|»'Uf m| th.- .'l\ I'll I 

• apil lie Ban 



618 Capitalist Production. 

that part of the original capital which has entered upon its 
stage of renewal. This, in passing into its new shape, incor- 
porates gratis the social advance made while its old shape was 
being used up. Of course, this development of productive 
power is accompanied by a partial depreciation of functioning 
capital. So far as this depreciation makes itself acutely felt 
in competition, the burden falls on the labourer, in the increased 
exploitation of whom the capitalist looks for his indemnification. 

Labour transmits to its product the value of the means of 
production consumed by it. On the other hand, the value and 
mass of the means of production set in motion by a given 
quantity of labour increase as the labour becomes more pro- 
ductive. Though the same quantity of labour adds always fco 
its products only the same sum of new value, still the old 
capital-value, transmitted by the labour to the products, in- 
creases with the growing productivity of labour. 

An English and a Chinese spinner, e.g., may work the same 
number of hours with the same intensity ; then they will both 
in a week create equal values. But in spite of this equality, 
an immense difference will obtain between the value of the 
week's product of the Englishman, who works with a mighty 
automaton, and that of the Chinaman, who has but a spinning 
wheel. In the same time as the Chinaman spins one pound of 
cotton, the Englishman spins several hundreds of pounds. A 
sum, many hundred times as great, of old values swells the 
value of his product, in which those reappear in a new, useful 
form, and can thus function anew as capital. "In 1782," as 
Frederick Engels teaches us, " all the wool crop in England of 
the three preceding years, lay untouched for want of labourers, 
and so it must have lain, if newly invented machinery had not 
come to its aid and spun it." 1 Labour embodied in the form 
of machinery of course did not directly force into life a single 
man, but it made it possible for a smaller number of labourers, 
with the addition of relatively less living labour, not only to 
consume the wool productively, and put into it new value, but 
to preserve in the form of yarn, &c, its old value. At the 
same time, it caused and stimulated increased reproduction of 

1 Frederick Engels, "Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England," p. 20. 



Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital. 619 

wool. It is tin; natural property of living labour, to transmit 
old value, whilst it creates new. Hence, with t 
efficacy, extent and valu<- na of prodacti 

qaently with the sccamalatioD that accompanies the di 

at of its productive p rarer, lab >nr keeps op an 
nil always in< -value in a form ever m n 1 This 

v baa, on account of a I analysis of the labour process, ami 

of tin- ].r •••ating value, n« v. r properly gn 

doction, a» may be Men in M 7*i e -'J- • r lli> ' ehang* in pruii 

vayi prodoeeia BnaafMl 1 samevalui-." 'I 

if the extension ami I intensity of their labour ar-- given. But it 

this Hi rm we) * million 

with ilitf • of productivity in their lal 

masses of tl. ., end therefore preservii 

ducts very different masses of value ; in consequence of which the values of 
ducts j oooeidereJ ly. I> irdo has, it may he not«<l in pa- 

in va. • ;y, by tl xample, I 

value (which he here calls wca'th <>r I riohea) an 1 exchange-value. 8ay 

answers: '" (,>uant a la difficult. 1 > en dieant qoe, pa) 

llion di per* 
heaecs, saio \>r<> 1 t pas ui. 

. ai 1 1 - i ipj'on le « 1 • * 1 1 . la ■ omme an el on 

• Ui »• tvi. .. •, prodnetifi do 00O J© ses capitaux, 

It oee on 
none aoqaerone tous leu ta qui sont au Or 

servioei produeiifi intent plni 

i. ii. nt dans '. hooee 

: 

•'-»r him, not f<>r Kicai .%r up it I 

reeee, wi. 
taereaioa in eoneequence of increa* of lahour? Arts 

difficulty is m> <i please. Kinhange Time 

is a thing that i ge. If 

id III' .1! ' 

as day that) tloa in proportion as ll 

I or© uae-valw« «, t •>. si 

ufacturrr, the ri« • r n I. 
recollects that " with a gl 
r HIM '.) falls "par 

eoneoff not lee (lee pr re) oblige A <i '. « ee qulli 

content. " Bat whence doee the profit 00000. if - >lnt sells the ootnmo 

• er mind ! Say declares that, in coi « 
daetivity, errr I r • jjivcn enjoin! 

*rn».s a t. is precisely tlMinropo* 
*rdo thi ltd at «! 

t|MMtrophiaee Ma! . monsieur. U 

Men Uee, sans laqaelle il eel impoealbU, )» U declare, d 
dlAcnltes de I'eoonomie politique, at notainment, comment tl 

.ont do valcur, quotqao la riehcace soil i I 



620 Capitalist Production. 

natural power of labour takes the appearance of an intrinsic 
property of capital, in which it is incorporated, just as the pro- 
ductive forces of social labour take the appearance of inherent 
properties of capital, and as the constant appropriation of 
surplus-labour by the capitalists, takes that of a constant self- 
expansion of capital. 

With the increase of capital, the difference between the 
capital employed and the capital consumed increases. In other 
words, there is increase in the value and the material mass of 
the instruments of labour, such as buildings, machinery, drain- 
pipes, working- cattle, apparatus of every kind that function 
for a longer or shorter time in processes of production constantly 
repeated, or that serve for the attainment of particular useful 
effects, whilst they themselves only gradually wear out, there- 
fore only lose their value piecemeal, therefore transfer that 
value to the product only bit by bit. In the same proportion 
as these instruments of labour serve as product-formers without 
adding value to the product, i.e., in the same proportion as they 
are wholly employed but only partly consumed, they perform, 
as we saw earlier, the same gratuitous service as the natural 
forces, water, steam, air, electricity, etc. This gratuitous service 
of past labour, when seized and filled with a soul by living 
labour, increases with the advancing stages of accumulation. 

Since past labour always disguises itself as capital, i.e., since 
the passive of the labour of A, B, C, etc., takes the form of the 
active of the non-labourer X, bourgeois and political economists 
are full of praises of the services of dead and gone labour, 
which, according to the Scotch genius M'Culloch, ought to 
receive a special remuneration in the shape of interest, profit, 
etc. 1 The powerful and ever-increasing assistance given by 

valeur." (1. c. p. 170.) An English economist remarks upon the conjuring tricks of 
the same nature that appear in Say's "Lettres": "Those affected ways of talking 
make up in general that which M. Say is pleased to call his doctrine and which he 
earnestly urges Malthus to teach at Hertford, as it is already taught ' dans plusieurs 
parties de l'Europe.' He says, ' Si vous trouvez une physionomie de paradoxe a 
toutes ces propositions, voyez les choses qu'elles expriment, et j'os- croire qu'elles 
vous paraitront fort simples et fort raisonnables. ' Doubtless, and in consequence of 
the same process, they will appear everything else, except original." (An Inquiry 
into those Principles respecting the Nature of Demand, &c, p. 116, 110.) 

1 M'Culloch took out a patent for " wages of past labour," long before Senior did 
for " wages of abstinence." 



Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital. 621 

ir to the living labour process under the f< Tin of m- 
of production is, therefore, attributed to that form of | 
iir in which it is alienated, as unpaid labour, from the 
If, i.e., to its capitalistic form. The practica 
of capitalistic production and their pettifogging ideol 
unable to think of the means of production u te from the 

ant.- I mask they ireai to-d r t«» 

think of the worker himself as distinct from his character 

With a given degree of exploitation of labour-power, the 

rplus-value produced i> determined by the number 

of v Lmultaneously exploited; and this CMiT.--p.nd-, 

although in varying proportions, with the magnitude of the 

tal. The more, there! ipitaJ inci by meant I 

unulations, the more <\>»'> the Bum of the value 

increase that \b divided u osumption-fund and imu- 

m-fund. The capitalisl can, tl. jolly 

• • me time show more "abstinent And, 

finally, all the springs of production act with [ dty, 

the more it- \b with the masa of the cai 

advano 

8E< \i ill- 1 lboj ■ n m». 

It i ihown in • thia inquiry tl ital ifl 

! ud". but i^ a |»:n t ol 

•lv fluctuatii h rarplu 

tnaJ capital, h I'm th«T 

thai • 'ii n apital 

ur- power, th< to be 

iinically, all conditi i fov 

- 

ire independently of man . I in it. form 

ital, allowing it, within certain lin i of 

In thifl inquiry nv •• 
i all • |-i <•• ilati n 

which 1 the 

lame man «>t capil \ pposed I 

I 



622 Capitalist Production. 

social production in a form developed by purely spontaneous 
growth, we neglected any more rational combination, directly 
and systematically practicable with the means of production, 
and the mass of labour-power at present disposable. Classical 
economy always loved to conceive social capital as a fixed 
magnitude of a fixed degree of efficiency. But this prejudice 
was first established as a dogma by the arch-Philistine, Jeremy 
Bentham, that insipid, pedantic, leather-tongued oracle of the 
ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century. 1 Bentham 
is among philosophers what Martin Tupper is among poets. 
Both could only have been manufactured in England. 2 In the 
light of his dogma the commonest phenomena of the process of 
production, as, e.g., its sudden expansions and contractions, nay, 
even accumulation itself, become perfectly inconceivable. 3 The 
dogma was used by Bentham himself, as well as by Malthus, 

1 Compare among others, Jeremy Bentham : " Th6orie des Peines et des Recom- 
penses, traduct. d'Et. Dumont, 3eme edit. Paris, 1826," p. II., L. IV., ch. II. 

2 Bentham is a purely English phenomenon. Not even excepting our philosopher, 
Christian Wolf, in no time and in no country has the most homespun common-place 
ever strutted about in so self-satisfied a way. The principle of utility was no dis- 
covery of Bentham. He simply reproduced in his dull way wLat Helvetius and 
other Frenchmen had said with esprit in the 18th century. To know what is useful 
for a dog, one must study dog-nature. This nature itself is not to be deduced 
from the principle of utility. Applying this to man, he that would criticise all 
human acts, movements, relations, etc., by the principle of utility, must first deal 
with human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified in each 
historical epoch. Bentham makes short work of it. With the dryest naivete he 
takes the modern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man. 
Whatever is useful to this queer normal man, and to his world, is absolutely useful. 
This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present, and future. The Christian 
religion, e.g., is " useful," because it forbids in the name of religion the same faults 
that the penal code condemns in the name of the law. Artistic criticism is " harm- 
ful, "because it disturbs worthy people in their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. 
With such rubbish has the brave fellow, with his motto, " nulla dies sine linea," piled 
up mountains of books. Had I the courage of my friend, Heinrich Heine, I should 
call Mr. Jeremy a genius in the way of bourgeois stupidity. 

3 " Political economists are too apt to consider a certain quantity of capital and a 
certain number of labourers as productive instruments of uniform power, or operating 
with a certain uniform intensity . . . Those . . . who maintain . . . that commodi- 
ties are the sole agents of production . . . prove that production could never be en- 
larged, for it requires as an indispensable condition to such an enlargement that food, 
raw materials, and tools should be previously augmented ; which is in fact maintain- 
ing that no increase of production can take place without a previous increase, or, in 
other words, that an increase is impossible." (S. Bailey: " Money and its wcissi- 
tudes," pp. 26 and 70.) Bailey criticises the dogma mainly from the point of view of 
the process of circulation. 



Conversion of Surplus- Value into Capital. 623 

James Mill, M'Culloch, etc., for an apologetic purp< 

-cially in order to represent one part of capital, namely, 
variable capital, or that part convertible into labour-power, as 
a fixed magnitude. The material of variable capital, Le., the 
mass of the means of Bubsifitence it represents for the labourer, 
or the so-called labour fund, was fabled as a separate pari of 
Lai wealth, fixed by natural laws and unchangeable. To set in 
motion the part of Bocial wealth which i^ to function as constant 
capital, or, to express it in a material form, as means of pi - 
duction, a definite mass of living labour is required. This mass 
is given technologically. But neither is the number of laboun ra 
required to render fluid this mass of labour-power 1 (it 

changes with the degree of exploitation of the individual 
labour-power), nor is the price of this labour-power . but 

only its minimum limit, which is moreover very variable. The 
facts that lie at the bottom of this dojni on the 

hand, the labourer bas no right to into rfere in the division of 
social wealth into means of enjoyment for the non-labourer 
and means of production. 1 On the other hand, only in 
favourable and exceptional cases, has be the power to enli 
I >fund at the 1 t I be " revenue 

the wealthy. 
\Vi,.i; n\ . ' igy results from the attempt to repress nt the 

slimits of the labour-fund ts natural and m 
limits may be seen, e.g. t in Pi rFa ■ ;• M The circulating 

capital iiii \\ , h fund. 1 [ence, if we 

calculate the ived by • 

ot( r, v. imply to divide the amount of this cai 



; .m Stw.irf Mill, in Ul " FriootplOB of POlM .' I 

rr.illy ri rl ..f |„ [] 

>'l . . . I 
Ofi < .-rtiin i- |hi minimum of n . . . \ 

J, II 111 any ju*t nrra' 

■ \y in an 

■tea Itboofb noon 

" tlon twtwt lrm „ an ,i • 

with Ibi l-< r.l • 
I 

II k, ProftOMT of F "1101117 At C»mbrHgc. 

Moo «•• 'iiii Labourer." 1- |m;' 1( j. 



624 Capitalist Production. 

by the number of the labouring population." Y That is to say, 
we first add together the individual wages actually paid, and 
then we affirm that the sum thus obtained, forms the total 
value of the " labour-fund " determined and vouchsafed to us by 
God and Nature. Lastly, we divide the sum thus obtained by 
the number of labourers to find out again how much may come 
to each on the average. An uncommonly knowing dodge this. It 
did not prevent Mr. Fawcett saying in the same breath : " The 
aggregate wealth which is annually saved in England, is 
divided into two portions ; one portion is employed as capital 
to maintain our industry, and the other portion is exported to 
foreign countries . . . Only a portion, and perhaps, not a large 
portion of the wealth which is annually saved in this country, 
is invested in our own industry." 2 

The greater part of the yearly accruing surplus-product, 
embezzled, because abstracted without return of an equivalent, 
from the English labourer, is thus used as capital, not in 
England, but in foreign countries. But with the additional 
capital thus exported, a part of the "labour-fund " invented by 
God and Bentham is also exported. 3 

1 I must here remind the reader that the categories, " variable and constant capital, " 
were first used by me. Political Economy since the time of Adam Smith has con- 
fusedly mixed up the essential distinctions involved in these categories, with the 
mere formal differences, arising out of the process of circulation, of fixed and 
circulating capital. For further details on this point, see Book II., Part II. 

2 Fawcett, 1. c. pp. 122, 123. 

3 It might be said that not only capital, but also labourers, in the shape of emigrants, 
are annually exported from England. In the text, however, there is no question of 
the peculium of the emigrants, who are in great part not labourers. The sons 
of farmers make up a great part of them. The additional capital annually trans- 
ported abroad to be put out at interest is in much greater proportion to the annual 
accumulation than the yearly emigration is to the yearly increase of population. 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 625 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION. 

[OH 1. — THK arOQUUHD WfAMD PCS LABOUB-FOWBB that A< 
rmil AOOUMl LAXXOJT, 'J hi. OOMFOSBI VIAL ki.maimnw jhk 

O. 

In this chapter we consider the influence of the growth of 
capital on tlit; lot of the labouring class. The most important 
>r in this inquiry, is the composition of capital and the 
changes it undergoes in the course of the process of accumu- 
lation. 
The composition of capital is to be onderotood in a twofold 
l hi the side of value, it is determined by the proportion 
in which it is divided into constant capital or value of the 
of production, and variable capital or valued labour- 
power, the ram total of wagea On the side of material, 1 
functions in the pi t* production, all capital is divided 

Into means of production and living labour-power. This latter 

relation I n I he mai 

Hie 1 luction employed, on the one band, and the 

;' labour n< ry for their employment on the other 

I call the former the valtk -compu the latter the tech* 

cm, capital Between the two there is a si 

ii , 1 call tin- value-composition 
capital, in bo fiu as ii is determined by ita technical composi- 
tion ami luirroi tin; chan_"s <.f the latter, the . 
com) pital. Wnerever I 1 tion 

ipital, without fui ther qualifi 
»d. 
The many individual capitals inv« - 1 « -< 1 in a particular hranch 
nf p: ■ ■ . • with anoth) r, in< th l.iit 

corny* 1 itioi •• a\ . 1 1 tin 1 n<li\ idual 1 

t Ih- com] • -i uf t i pital in thi^ branch 

:i I .:i tlv, tip i-s, in 

f produ the con 



626 Capitalist Production. 

social capital of a country, and with this alone are we, in the 
last resort, concerned in the following investigation. 

Growth of capital involves growth of its variable constituent 
or of the part invested in labour-power. A part of the surplus- 
value turned into additional capital must always be re-trans- 
formed into variable capital, or additional labour-fund. If we 
suppose that, all other circumstances remaining the same, the 
composition of capital also remains constant (i.e., that a definite 
mass of means of production constantly needs the same mass 
of labour-power to set it in motion), then the demand for 
labour and the subsistence-fund of the labourers clearly in- 
crease in the same proportion as the capital, and the more 
rapidly, the more rapidly the capital increases. Since the 
capital produces yearly a surplus-value, of which one part is 
yearly added to the original capital ; since this increment 
itself grows yearly along with the augmentation of the capital 
already functioning ; since lastly, under special stimulus to 
enrichment, such as the opening of new markets, or of new 
spheres for the outlay of capital in consequence of newly 
developed social wants, &c, the scale of accumulation may be 
suddenly extended, merely by a change in the division of 
the surplus-value or surplus-product into capital and revenue, 
the requirements of accumulating capital may exceed the 
increase of labour-power or of the number of labourers; the 
demand for labourers may exceed the supply, and, therefore, 
wages may rise. This must, indeed, ultimately be the case if 
the conditions supposed above continue. For since in each 
year more labourers are employed than in its predecessor, 
sooner or later a point must be reached, at which the require- 
ments of accumulation begin to surpass the customary supply 
of labour, and, therefore, a rise of wages takes place. A 
lamentation on this score was heard in England during the 
whole of the fifteenth, and the first half of the eighteenth 
centuries. The more or less favourable circumstances in which 
the wage-working class supports and multiplies itself, in no 
way alter the fundamental character of capitalist production. As 
simple reproduction constantly reproduces the capital-relation 
itself, i.e., the relation of capitalists on the one hand, and wage- 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 627 

workers on the other, so reproduction on a progrec 
accumulation, reproduces the capital-relation 00 a | rive 

scale, more capitalists or larger capitalists at this pole, mora 
porkers at that. The reproduction of a mass of labour- 
power, which must incessantly re-incorporate itself with 
capital for that capital's self-expansiou ; which cannot 

from capital, and whose enslavement to capital i-> only 

concealed by the variety of individual capitalists to whom it 

■ells itself, this reproduction of labour-power forms, in Eact, an 

ntial of the reproduction of capital itself Accumulation 

of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat. 1 

Classical economy grasped this t thoroughly thai Adam 

Smith, Ricardo, mentioned earlier, inaccurately identi- 

fied accumulation with the consumption, by the productive 
labourers, of all the capitalised part of the Burplus-produci 
with its transformation into additional wage-la ra A- 

early 16 ' ; J bn !'< U 1 . " For if one bad a hundred 

thousand a f land I many pounds in m .icy. an 

many cattle, without a labourer, what would the rich man he, 
hut a labourer 1 And u the labourers make men rich, bo the 
more labourers, there will he the more rich men . . . the labour 
<>f the poor being the mines of the rich." 1 . s, » also I' oard 
de liandeville .-it the I •-. innin 1 of the eighteenth centuri 'dt 

pi' <[> i ty is well aecui I 9 ith- 

oui monej bpoor; for who would do the work I 

\ they [tic • t.. 1 . 1.. pt from itai i 1 

they should n oothing worth Lf here and there 

1 K.irl Mir •.»«•■«, j. lu 

Uirc» «'t pill* ; 

*)t <i«« I • i . • II I ; 

m •> ■: one Otbi 

«cU, »• toon am I. 
of iggimiitlUemonl "f "Monsieur capital," n* IVcqucur calli tin* person. " I i.- 

v 1 | 

l ' ' 

Mi property witli Iht fr<-. rmnf-ataa 11 

, bt tin- c»»« , if tin j.i sn. ili«l« • 

• Lt 111. A* far mm In* health i« OOQOcmod, •uch I 

vtO r*mr oorn; 

ami Mrofuloua uj.|h r « 1»»». •• lint, ilin Katelwr, 

< luath of I Airtt I 
■ - . ! < 1 



628 Capitalist Production. 

one of the lowest class by uncommon industry, and pinching 
his belly, lifts himself above the condition he was brought up 
in, nobody ought to hinder him; nay, it is undeniably the 
wisest course for every person in the society, and for every 
private family to be frugal ; but it is the interest of all rich 
nations, that the greatest part of the poor should almost never 
be idle, and yet continually spend what they get . . . Those 
that get their living by their daily labour . . . have nothing 
to stir them up to be serviceable but their wants which it is 
prudence to relieve, but folly to cure. The only thing then 
that can render the labouring man industrious, is a moderate 
quantity of money, for as too little will, according as his temper 
is, either dispirit or make him desperate, so too much will 
make him insolent and lazy. . . From what has been said, it is 
manifest, that, in a free nation, where slaves are not allowed 
of, the surest wealth consists in a multitude of laborious 
poor ; for besides, that they are the never-failing nursery of 
fleets and armies, without them there could be no enjoyment, 
and no product of any country could be valuable. To make 
the society " [which of course consists of non- workers] " happy 
and people easier under the meanest circumstances, it is 
requisite that great numbers of them should be ignorant as 
well as poor; knowledge both enlarges and multiplies our 
desires, and the fewer things a man wishes for, the more easily 
his necessities may be supplied." x What Mandeville, an 
honest, clear-headed man, had not yet seen, is that the mech- 
anism of the process of accumulation itself increases, along 
with the capital, the mass of " labouring poor," i.e., the wage- 
labourers, who turn their labour-power into an increasing 
power of self-expansion of the growing capital, and even by 
doing so must eternize their dependent relation on their own 
product, as personified in the capitalists. In reference to this 
relation of dependence, Sir F. M. Eden in his " The State of 

1 Bernard de Mandeville : "The Fable of the Bees, "5th edition, London, 1728. 
Remarks, pp. 212^ 213, 328. "Temperate living and constant employment is the 
direct road, for the poor, to rational happiness " [by which he most probably means 
long working days and little means of subsistence], " and to riches and strength for 
the state" (viz., for the landlords, capitalists, and their political dignitaries and 
agents). {An Essay on Trade and Commerce, London, 1770, p. 54.) 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 629 

the Poor, an History of the Labouring l in Bns 

\ " the natural produce of our soil 18 <•• rtainly Dot i" 
adequate to our subsistence ; we can neither be clothed, lodi 
nor fed but in consequence of some previous labour. A p irtion 
at least of the be in igably employed . . 

There are others who, though th< ither toil nor Bpin, 1 

command the produce of industry, but who owe tl 
mption from labour solely to civilisation and order. . . 
They are peculiarly the creatures of civil institutions, 1 which 
havi jni ••• I that individuals may acquire property by 

varioui idea the exertion of labour. . . P 

of independent fortune . . . owe their superior advantages by 
no means to any luperior abiliti their own, but almost 

rely . . . I industry of others. It is not the posses- 

1 f land, or of money, but the command of labour which 
inguishes the opulent from the lab raring part of the com- 
munity. . . This [scheme approved by Eden] would the 
people of property sufficient [but by no means too much) 
influence and authority over those who . . . work for them; 
and it would pis ifa laboure in an abject or servile 
lition, but in such and liberal d< pendence 
til who know human nature, and it ry. will alio* 

»-ary f«»r t h-ir uwn n iuf..rt." - Bir 1". Id I '. i-n, it may 

remarked in ] A.dam Smith 

during the eighteenth century thai produced any work of 
imp 

11 have a»k<-'!, wh<"> ro« then are "the ri\il • mi? 

h« doea d<H regard the law u a p 
Um n • mi* of iT'iiintiuii, bi 

' <lv* lou 

with 

I ' I ; ;■ I . '.', in 1 |>r- fn. 

1 If 1 -T remind ■ p 

it tint N»<itk in i( 'halt n »* ! 

ii, ■ up t r S da l plagiary <>f ]> i 

itiil doM not contain a m 
ti thia |«in|>iilct OMW 
I 
of |h.|.uI kti'ii, ilowly work atght— oth oeot 

of A gr«*i Social 1 n*i*. I 

to tlio t mantling! of Condorcvt, Ac, wu greet I 

oligarchy** the great »1 .uinan .. 



630 Capitalist Production. 

Under the conditions of accumulation supposed thus far, 
which conditions are those most favourable to the labourers, 
their relation of dependence upon capital takes on a form 
endurable, or, as Eden says : " easy and liberal." Instead of be- 
coming more intensive with the growth of capital, this relation 

hugely astonished at his success, gave himself to stuffing into his book materials 
superficially compiled, and adding to it new matter, not discovered but annexed by 
him. Note further : Although Malthus was a parson of the English State Church, 
he had taken the monastic vow of celibacy — one of the conditions of holding a 
Fellowship in Protestant Cambridge University : " Socios collegiorum maritos esse 
non permittimus, sed statim postquam quis uxorem duxerit, socius collegii desinat 
esse." (Reports of Cambridge University Commission, p. 172.) This circumstance 
favourably distinguishes Malthus from the other Protestant parsons, who have 
shuffled off the command enjoining celibacy of the priesthood and have taken, 
" Be fruitful and multiply," as their special Biblical mission in such a degree that 
they generally contribute to the increase of population to a really unbecoming extent, 
whilst they preach at the same time to the labourers the "principle of population." 
It is characteristic that the economic fall of man, the Adam's apple, the urgent 
appetite, "the checks which tend to blunt the shafts of Cupid," as Parson Townsend 
waggishly puts it, that this delicate question was and is monopolised by the Reverends 
of Protestant Theology, or rather of the Protestant Church. With the exception 
of the Venetian monk, Ortes, an original and clever writer, most of the population- 
theory teachers are Protestant parsons. For instance, Bruckner, " Theorie du Systeme 
animal," Leyden, 1767, in which the whole subject of the modern population theory 
is exhausted, and to which the passing quarrel between Quesnay and his pupil, the 
elder Mirabeau, furnished ideas on the same topic ; then Parson Wallace, Parson 
Townsend, Parson Malthus and his pupil, the arch-Parson Thomas Chalmers, to say 
nothing of lesser reverend scribblers in this line. Originally, political economy was 
studied by philosophers like Hobbes, Locke, Hume ; by business men and statesmen, 
like Thomas More, Temple, Sully, De Witt, North, Law, Vanderlint, Cantillon, 
Franklin ; and especially, and with the greatest success, by medical men like Petty, 
Barbon, Mandeville, Quesnay. Even in the middle of the eighteenth century, the 
Rev. Mr. Tucker, a notable economist of his time, excused himself for meddling with 
the things of Mammon. Later on, and in truth with this very "principle of popu- 
lation," struck the hour of the Protestant parsons. Petty, who regarded the 
population as the basis of wealth, and was, like Adam Smith, an outspoken foe to 
parsons, says, as if he had a presentiment of their bungling interference, "that 
Religion best flourishes when the Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the 
Law, which best flourisheth when lawyers have least to do. " He advises the Protestant 
priests, therefore, if they, once for all, will not follow the Apostle Paul and "mortify" 
themselves by celibacy, " not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices, as they 
now stand shared out, will receive, that is to say, if there be places for about twelve 
thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed up 24000 ministers, for 
then the twelve thousand which are unprovided for, will seek ways how to get them- 
selves a livelihood, which they cannot do more easily then by persuading the people 
that the twelve thousand incumbents do poison or starve their souls, and misguide 
them in their way to Heaven." (Petty; "A Treatise on Taxes and Contributions 
London, 1667," p. 57.) Adam's Smith's position with the Protestant priesthood of 
his time i3 shown by the following. In " A Letter to A. Smith, L.L.D. On the 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 63 1 

of dependence only becomes more extensive, i.e., the sphere of 
capital's exploitation and rule merely extends with its own 
dimensions and the number of its subjects. A larger part I 
their own surplus-product, always increasing and continually 
transformed into additional capital, comes back to them in the 
shape of means of payment, so that they can extend the circle 
of their enjoyments; can make some additions to their c 
sumption-fund of clothes, furniture, &c., and can lay by small 
-funds of money. But just as little as better clothing, 
food, and treatment, and a larger peculinm, do away with the 
exploitation of the slave, SO little do they set aside that of 

•-worker. A. rise in the price of labour, as a consequence 
of accumulation of capital, only means, in fact, that the Length 
and weight of the go! Len chain the wage-worker has already 

d for himself, allow of a relaxation of the tension of it In 
the controversies on this subject the chief fact fa illy 

! D i v of his friend, Darid Hun. I MM of fchl I' 

tailed Chi lth Edition, Oxford, 1784,' Or. 1 

IVD Smith, b n a published Mi- >" i. '•. !•• "•::.': 

hi* friend David n (so. Hum irorld how "Home amused him ■ 

m-lf (;:. d with Luoian and Whist, n and b< ;i bad the impud 

I Burnt : " 1 1 
.is approaching aa nearly I rirtuoui i 

rhaps, the nature of human fr.iilty will pernuM iu a 

i, Sir, to bold Dp t- I 

possessed with 
: and who strained er< rj tu i re 
• 
,;ht no more bf had In n mi ml ' 

ith be disoouragi 17 » 

. Smith, ' I 

/.. by hi i 

1 ; but I thii. <■ 1 tl. ' "> 

ot David E 
ami t against N 

•n^ratul.vt' the hardened / Sea.' 

(I , i • ii Smith 

i death : M Smith's well-plaosd II 

1th bom ■ 
VOuld I ' -vn a f i 

D 1 I 
»ky witi 1 1 

'Uspiciont a» I 

■ 

1 . 1 toll*, III Ipil 



632 Capitalist Production. 

been overlooked, viz., the differentia specified of capitalistic 
production. Labour-power is sold to-day, not with a view of 
satisfying, by its service or by its product, the personal needs 
of the buyer. His aim is augmentation of his capital, produc- 
tion of commodities containing more labour than he pays for, 
containing therefore a portion of value that costs him nothing, 
and that is nevertheless realised when the commodities are sold. 
Production of surplus-value is the absolute law of this mode 
of production. Labour-power is only saleable so far as it pre- 
serves the means of production in their capacity of capital, 
reproduces its own value as capital, and yields in unpaid labour 
a source of additional capital. 1 The conditions of its sale, 
whether more or less favourable to the labourer, include there- 
fore the necessity of its constant re-selling, and the constantly 
extended reproduction of all wealth in the shape of capital. 
Wages, as we have seen, by their very nature, always imply 
the performance of a certain quantity of unpaid labour on the 
part of the labourer. Altogether, irrespective of the case of 
a rise of wages with a falling price of labour, &c, such an 
increase only means at best a quantitative diminution of the 
unpaid labour that the worker has to supply. This diminution 
can never reach the point at which it would threaten the 
system itself. Apart from violent conflicts as to the rate of 
wages (and Adam Smith has already shown that in such a con- 
flict, taken on the whole, the master is always master), a rise 
in the price of labour resulting from accumulation of capital 
implies the following alternative : 

Either the price of labour keeps on rising, because its rise 
does not interfere with the progress of accumulation. In this 
there is nothing wonderful, for, says Adam Smith, " after these 
(profits) are diminished, stock may not only continue to 

increase, but to increase much faster than before A 

great stock, though with small profits, generally increases 
faster than a small stock with great profits." (1. c. ii., p. 189.) 

1 "The limit, however, to the employment of both the operative aud the labourer 
is the same ; namely, the possibility of the employer realising a profit on the produce 
of their industry. If the rate of wages is such as to reduce the master's gains below 
the average profit of capital, he will cease to employ them, or he will only employ theifi 
on condition of submission to a reduction of wages." (John Wade, 1. c, p. 241) 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 633 

In this case it is evident that a diminution in the unpaid 
labour in no way interferes with the extension of the domain 
of capital. — Or, on the other hand, accumulation slackens in 
consequence of the rise in the price of labour, because the 
stimulus of gain is hluntcd. The rate of accumulation lessens ; 
but with its Lessening, the primary cause of that lessening 
vanishes, /'.<'., the disproportion between capital and exploitable 
labour-power. The mechanism of the process of capitalist 
production removes the very obsti that it temporarily 

creates. The price of labour falls again to a level correspond- 
ing with the needs of the self-expansion (-fcapit.il, whether the 
level be below, th<- sam< above the one which was normal 

before the rise of wages took place. We see thus: In the first 
it is uot the diminished rate either of the absolute, or of the 
proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring population, 
whicb c capital to I"- in excess, but conversely the ez< 

of capital that makes exploitable labour-power insufficient In 
the second case, it is not the increased rate either of the absolute, 
or of the proportional, increase in labour-power, or labouring 
population, that makes capital insufficient; but, convei 
the relative diminution of capital that causes the exploitatable 
ur-puu er, or rather its price, to be in < It i 

•lute movemei the accumulation of capital which 

reflected as relative movement* ofthe mass of exploitable labour- 
power, and th< in produced by the tatter's own inde- 
pendent movement To put it mathematically; the rat 
accumulation is the independi nl no! the dependent, variable ; 
the rate of wi the dependent, no! the independent, v 
able. Thus, when the industrial cycle is in the phase ofcri 
oeral Gall in the price of coimnoriitii pi.-^-.i a 

in the value Ol y, ami, in t In- pha>r uf pru.Nprrity, < ial 

m the price of >mmodi1 i< rail in the \ slue of moi 

Tip- so-called currency school concludes from this thai with 

little, with l"\v pii"' much m<>mv i*> m 

circulation. Their ignorance and complete misundei tand 

in ' of fin : •• w ..it Inly paralleled by th' 



634 Capitalist Production. 

who interpret the above phenomena of accumulation by 
saying that there are now too few, now too many wage 
labourers. 

The law of capitalist production, that is at the bottom of the 
pretended "natural law of population," reduces itself simply 
to this : The correlation between accumulation of capital and 
rate of wages is nothing else than the correlation between the 
unpaid labour transformed into capital, and the additional paid 
labour necessary for the setting in motion of this additional 
capital. It is therefore in no way a relation between two 
magnitudes, independent one of the other : on the one hand, 
the magnitude of the capital ; on the other, the number of 
the labouring population ; it is rather, at bottom, only the 
relation between the unpaid and the paid labour of the same 
labouring population. If the quantity of unpaid labour 
supplied by the working-class, and accumulated by the 
capitalist class, increases so rapidly that its conversion into 
capital requires an extraordinary addition of paid labour, then 
wages rise, and, all other circumstances remaining equal, the un- 
paid labour diminishes in proportion. But as soon as this 
diminution touches the point at which the surplus-labour that 
nourishes capital is no longer supplied in normal quantity, a 
reaction sets in : a smaller part of revenue is capitalised, accumu- 
lation lags, and the movement of rise in wages receives a 
check. The rise of wages therefore is confined within limits 
that not only leave intact the foundations of the capitalistic 
system, but also secure its reproduction on a progressive scale. 
The law of capitalistic accumulation, metamorphosed by econo- 
mists into a pretended law of nature, in reality merely states 
that the very nature of accumulation excludes every diminu- 
tion in the degree of exploitation of labour, and every rise in 
the price of labour, which could seriously imperil the continual 
reproduction, on an ever enlarging scale, of the capitalistic 
relation. It cannot be otherwise in a mode of production in 
which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of self-expansion 
of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, material wealth 
existing to satisfy the needs of development on the part of the 
labourer. As, in religion, man is governed by the products of 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 655 

Tils own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by 
(he products of his own hand. 1 



UOnOM 2. — RELATIVE DIMIM TIoN OF THE VARIABLE PART OF OAFIXAt 
UMULTAOTOUSLl WITH THE PBOGRE88OI ACCUMULATION AM) Of THE 
OOKCXlfTSATIOB THAT AOOOMPAVIia IT. 

According to the economists themselves, it is n the 

•nt of social wealth, nor the magnitude of the capital 
already functioning, that lead to a rise of wages, but only the 
c instant growth of accumulation and the decree of rapidity of 
tiiat growth. 'Adam Smith, Book I., chapter 8.) So far, we 
have "nly considered one special phase of this process, that in 
which the increase of capital occurs along with a constant 
technical composition of capital. But the process goi 
this phi 

Once given the general basis of the capitalistic system, then, 
in the course of accumulation, a point is reached at which the 
development of the productivity of social labour bei the 

r powerful lever of accumulation u The same cause," says 
Adam Smith, " which raises the wages of labour, the incn 
stock, tend* to increase it- productive powers, and to mal 
smaller quantity of labour produc r quantity of work." 

Apart from uatura] conditions, such as fertility of the soil, 
and from the ikill of independent and isolated produ< 
(shown rather qualitatively in the goodness than quantitatively 
in the n r products , the of pro< luctivii 

U-, in a given in the relative 

of the 1 1 I production that one I r, dui ing 1 gi 

time, with tin- same ten f labour*] turns into pi 

dii'-' l' • a-s of the means of production which he thus 

1 1, i's w ith the productiveness of hi ur 

1 " I 1 it wa» 

nnly tli- r- rail of bom 1 • tni qu 

n undi r tin- domination <>f . 
; u» in reality thin ia l*<-y»inl <li->j 
.11 ; « ■ . 1 1 
or«*t ! otlon 

.: I; ' k, LSSf, It in I 1 in. ;, ■> n. : . 1 I > 



636 Capitalist Production, 

But those means of production play a double part. The in- 
crease of some is a consequence, that of the others a condition 
of the increasing productivity of labour. E.g., with the divi- 
sion of labour in manufacture, and with the use of machinery, 
more raw material is worked up in the same time, and, there- 
fore, a greater mass of raw material and auxiliary substances 
enter into the labour-process. That is the consequence of the 
increasing productivity of labour. On the other hand, the 
mass of machinery, beasts of burden, mineral manures, drain- 
pipes, &c, is a condition of the increasing productivity of 
labour. So also is it with the means of production concen- 
trated in buildings, furnaces, means of transport, &c. But 
whether condition or consequence, the growing extent of the 
means of production, as compared with the labour-power in- 
corporated with them, is an expression of the growing produc- 
tiveness of labour. The increase of the latter appears, there- 
fore, in the diminution of the mass of labour in proportion to 
the mass of means of production moved by it, or in the dimi- 
nution of the subjective factor of the labour process as compared 
with the objective factor. 

This change in the technical composition of capital, this 
growth in the mass of means of production, as compared with 
the mass of the labour-power that vivifies them, is reflected 
again in its value-composition, by the increase of the constant 
constituent of capital at the expense of its variable constituent. 
There may be, e.g., originally 50 per cent, of a capital laid 
out in means of production, and 50 per cent, in labour-power ; 
later on, with the development of the productivity of labour, 
80 per cent, in means of production, 20 per cent, in labour- 
power, and so on. This law of the progressive increase in 
constant capital, in proportion to the variable, is confirmed at 
every step (as already shown) by the comparative analysis of 
the prices of commodities, whether we compare different econ- 
omic epochs or different nations in the same epoch. The rela- 
tive magnitude of the element of price, which represents the 
value of the means of production only, or the constant part of 
capital consumed, is in direct, the relative magnitude of the 
other element of price that pays labour (the variable part of 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 637 

capital) is in inverse proportion to the advance of accumula- 
tion. 

This diminution in the variable part of capital as oompan 1 
with the constant, or the altered value-composition <,f the 

capital, however, only .shows approximately the d in the 

composition <-i' its material constituents. If, &g. 9 the capital- 
value employed to-day in spinning ifl | constant and 1 variable, 
whilst at the beginning of tin- 18th century it was j constant 
and j variable, on the other band, the man of raw material, 
instruments uf labour, fee., thi 'tain quantity of spinning 

labour consume! productively to-day, Lb many hundred times 
ber than at til-- beginning of the 18th century. The 
imply that, with tip- increasing productivity of labour, not 
only d< ftl means of production consumed by it 

increa e, but their value compared with their mass diminisl 
Their value t ; absolutely, hut not in proportion to 

tln-ir ma— . Th'- in< <»f tin* <litlV'rence between constant 

and variable capital is, there f ore, much less than thai of the 
difference between the ma— of the means of production into 
which the constant, and the mass of the labour-power into 
which the variable, capita] verted The former dii 

inn '. it li t Ii.- latter, hut in a smaller degl 

But, if the pi cumulation !■ tin- nlative 

of the variable part ital, it by no means, in 

doin Kcludes the possibility of a rise in i t ^ absolute 

Suppose that a <\api tal-vahm at tirM i^ divided 

.".M j •. (.t* 1 1 .t an-1 r.o j t variable 

capital ; hit • r ii • • cut of constant and 20 p 

triable. If in the meantime the original capital, 

has im i : 1 i . £lsnnu it variah titimnt lias aU<> 

in«i It \n \i :>,()( )(), it i 1 1 ' I But H 

in inn apital hy 20 pi would 1 

sutl; the demand for laboui 20 percent, now thi^ 

• wi ti il capital 

In I ri IV, it was shown, bow the development 

ial lain. Ill' pi- Mpp"-< 

rge seal'- , bon nly upon thin Bup| 

Bion iii« I tin 



638 Capitalist Production. 

of production economised by concentration on a vast scale ; how 
instruments of labour which, from their very nature, are only 
fit for use in common, such as a system of machinery, can be 
called into being; how huge natural forces can be pressed into the 
service of production; and how the transformation can be effected 
of the process of production into a technological application of 
science. On the basis of the production of commodities, where 
the means of production are the property of private persons, 
and where the artisan therefore either produces commodities, 
isolated from and independent of others, or sells his labour- 
power as a commodity, because he lacks the means for inde- 
pendent industry, co-operation on a large scale can realise itself 
only in the increase of individual capitals, only in proportion as 
the means of social production and the means of subsistence 
are transformed into the private property of capitalists. The 
basis of the production of commodities can admit of production 
on a large scale in the capitalistic form alone. A certain accu- 
mulation of capital, in the hands of individual producers of 
commodities, forms therefore the necessary preliminary of the 
specifically capitalistic mode of production. We had, there- 
fore, to assume that this occurs during the transition from 
handicraft to capitalistic industry. It may be called primiti- 
tive accumulation, because it is the historic basis, instead of 
the historic result of specifically capitalist production. How 
it itself originates, we need not here inquire as yet. It is 
enough that it forms the starting-point. But all methods 
for raising the social productive power of labour that are 
developed on this basis, are at the same time methods for the 
increased production of surplus- value or surplus-product, which 
in its turn is the formative element of accumulation. They 
are, therefore, at the same time methods of the production of 
capital by capital, or methods of its accelerated accumulation. 
The continual re-transformation of surplus-value into capital 
now appears in the shape of the increasing magnitude of the 
capital that enters into the process of production. This in 
turn is the basis of an extended scale of production, of the 
methods for raising the productive power of labour that accom- 
pany it, and of accelerated production of surplus-value. If, 



The General Lazv of Capitalist Accumulation. 659 

therefore, a certain degree of accumulation of capita] ap] 
as a condition of* the specifically capitalist mode of production] 
the latter causes com an accelenU umulatu n 

tal. With the accumulation of capital, thei 
fically capitalistic mode of production developes, and with the 
capitalist mode of production the accumulation of capital 
Qomic factors bring about, in tl mpound 
ratio of the impulses they reciprocally give one another, that 
change in the technical composition of capital by which the 

institueni always smaller and imalL a 

compared with the constant 

Every individual capital is a larger or smaller concentration 
of means of pro taction, with a c or re sp onding c immand ov< 
labour-army. Ever] accumulation b 
cumulation. With the inert 

o 

Jth which functi capital, accumulation increases the 

of thai wealth in the hands of individual caj 
, and t . widens the of production on ■ If 

•and <>ft: dficmetbo apitalUt production, The 

growth * i 1 capita itcd by the growth of many 

individual capita AM other circumstances remaining ' 

B, individual nd with tic in the 

luction, iici.-a-.- in Mich pi • hey 

foi mi ali [a i \ ial capital At the 1 

of the apitals disengage tin in • 1\ 

fund 1 m a independ< pitala 1 1 

pi within capil families, plaj 

:it in thia With the accumulation 1 I 

• : kind ol 
w bich growi ly out 1 with 

cumulal i n. I 

band 

,.d. limited by 1 1 
I wealth 
in en- 1 1 pa: 

talista wl. a>> inderx ndenl 

u ith cm : 



640 Capitalist Production. 

concentration accompanying it are, therefore, not only scattered 
over many points, but the increase of each functioning capital 
is thwarted by the formation of new and the sub-division of old 
capitals. Accumulation, therefore, presents itself on the one 
hand as increasing concentration of the means of production, 
and of the command over labour ; on the other, as repulsion of 
many individual capitals one from another. 

This splitting-up of the total social capital into many indi- 
vidual capitals or the repulsion of its fractions one from an- 
other, is counteracted by their attraction. This last does not 
mean that simple concentration of the means of production 
and of the command over labour, which is identical with ac- 
cumulation. It is concentration of capitals already formed, 
destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of 
capitalist by capitalist, transformation of many small into few 
large capitals. This process differs from the former in this, 
that it only presupposes a change in the distribution of capital 
already to hand, and functioning ; its field of action is there- 
fore not limited by the absolute growth of social wealth, by 
the absolute limits of accumulation. Capital grows in one 
place to a huge mass in a single hand, because it has in another 
place been lost by many. This is centralisation proper, as dis- 
tinct from accumulation and concentration. 

The laws of this centralisation of capitals, or of the attrac- 
tion of capital by capital, cannot be developed here. A brief 
hint at a few facts must suffice. The battle of competition is 
fought by cheapening of commodities. The cheapness of 
commodities depends, cceteris 'paribus, on the productiveness of 
labour, and this again on the scale of production. Therefore, 
the larger capitals beat the smaller. It will further be re- 
membered that, with the development of the capitalist mode 
of production, there is an increase in the minimum amount of 
individual capital necessary to carry on a business under its 
normal conditions. The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into 
spheres of production which Modem Industry has only spor- 
adically or incompletely got hold of. Here competition rages 
in direct proportion to the number, and in inverse proportion 
to the magnitudes, of the antagonistic capitals. It always end- 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 641 

in the ruin of many small capitalists, \vi partly 

into the band of their conquerors, partly vanish. k\ 
from this, with capitalist prodaction an alt ■•_ 
comes into play — th< lit system. Not only is this itself a 
new and mighty weapon in the battle of competition, By 
•11 threads it, moreover, draws the disposable moi 
■ I in larger or small* -r m i th< 

into the hands of individual or asi 1 capitalists. It is 

the ■ machine for the centralisation of capil 

Tl bralisation of capitals or the pro© their attr 

tion li' more intense, in proportion as tl. ifically 

capitalist mode of production dei along with accumula- 

tion. In it- burn, centralisation bec«im»-s «.n-- «.{' tin 

this development it shortens and qui the 

transformation of leparsvte processes of production into ; 

tied and cai tied out on a larj 

I bulk of individual ma I \ becom 

the matei ial h fan uninterrupted revolution in the mode of 

luctiun Continually the cap mode of produc- 

tion conquers branches of industry no! wholly, or only 

: mally, (subjugated by it. At I i 

t i n 1 • ■ th< w up on it- soil new bran \ uch 

raid not exisl I inallj , in the branc I in- 

already can I b basis, 1 

duel made I f in a li<>tiiuu>«\ In 

all 1 1 . , tlir nun, • ion t-» 

the m us of 1 ■■ p by 1 b< m. An 

1 

into labour-] 

bnical efficiency 

the ■ pnxluitinn, • . in 

A 
hi plo ■ ■ 
duction t! 

in' an 

th< m tl"' 

the ms 



642 Capitalist Production. 

of the process of production. But soon the change of com- 
position and the technical transformation get more or less 
completely hold of all old capital that has reached the term of 
its reproduction, and therefore has to be replaced. This 
metamorphosis of old capital is independent, to a certain extent, 
of the absolute growth of social capital, in the same way as 
its centralisation. But this centralisation which only redistri- 
butes the social capital already to hand, and melts into one a 
number of old capitals, works in its turn as a powerful agent 
in this metamorphosis of old capital. 

On the one hand, therefore, the additional capital formed in 
the course of accumulation attracts fewer and fewer labourers 
in proportion to its magnitude. On the other hand, the old 
capital periodically reproduced with change of composition, 
repels more and more of the labourers formerly employed by 
it. 



SECTION 3. — PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION OP A RELATIVE SURPLUS-POPULA- 
TION OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE ARMY. 

The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as 
its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have seen, 
under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, 
under a constant increase of its constant, at the expense of its 
variable constituent. 1 

The specifically capitalist mode of production, the develop- 
ment of the productive power of labour corresponding to it, 
and the change thence resulting in the organic composition of 
capital, do not merely keep pace with the advance of accumu- 
lation, or with the growth of social wealth. They develop at 
a much quicker rate, because mere accumulation, the absolute 
increase of the total social capital, is accompanied by the cen- 
tralisation of the individual capitals of which that total is 

1 Note to the 3rd edition. In Marx's copy there is here the marginal note : "Here 
note for working out later ; if the extension is only quantitative, then for a greater 
and a smaller capital in the same branch of business the profits are as the magnitudes 
of the capitals advanced. If the quantitative extension induces qualitative change, 
then the rate of profit on the larger capital rises simultaneously." 



The (jcneral Laiu of Capitalist Accumulation, ' 

made up; and because the change in the techn 
position of the additional capital goes hand in hand with a 
similar change in the technological composition of the original 
capital. With the advance of accumulation, therei the 
proportion of constant to variable capital chang If it 
originally say 1 ; 1, it now': rely 2: 1, 3: 1, 4: 1 

l, 7: 1, & ■ ■ r the capita] increases, in I . 1 of 

I value, only ' J. '. .'. '. .v., ifl transformed into labour- 
power, and, on the other hand, - | into means of • 
Auction Since the demand for labour is determined 
the amounl pita! as a whole, but by its variable constitu- 
ent alone, that demand falls pi ly with the ii 
thu total capital, instead of, m previously med, rising in 
I stively t<> tl.r magnitude of 
Iota! capital, and at an accelerated i this magnitude in- 
With tli a t'n of the total capital, it- variable 
eon tituent or the labour incorporated in it, a 
but in a mtly diminishing proportion The intermediate 

I, in a bich accumulate »n woi simple 

if production, on a given technical basia U u 

cumulation i 

ing pi •:.. i needed t<> 

; \i an additional numl irei i • \ en, - n i 

of tl. tant in' tamoi ph A. t<> 1. 

those already fu ta rn, tin 

n and ii I j in 

tin- i liminution of 

ared witli il i 

diminuti 

w i t h 1 1 1 

: bia increase, tak--^ the 

iii- 
arease of ti».- lah«MiNiig jM.pulaiioii, an increaw alwayi moving 
i 

accuua 

•i fantl , an I pi Inc. - in tin- dli • 

own :.t. a i 

of 1 



644 Capitalist Production, 

for the average needs of the self -expansion of capital, and 
therefore a surplus-population. 

Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement 
of its accumulation now causes periodical changes, affecting it 
more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases 
simultaneously over the different spheres of production. In 
some spheres a change in the composition of capital occurs 
without increase of its absolute magnitude, as a consequence of 
simple centralisation ; in others the absolute growth of capital 
is connected with absolute diminution of its variable con- 
stituent, or of the labour-power absorbed by it ; in others 
again, capital continues growing for a time on its given technical 
basis, and attracts additional labour-power in proportion to 
its increase, while at other times it undergoes organic change, 
and lessens its variable constituent ; in all spheres, the increase 
of the variable part of capital, and therefore of the number of 
labourers employed by it, is always connected with violent 
fluctuations and transitory production of surplus-population, 
whether this takes the more striking form of the repulsion of 
labourers already employed, or the less evident but not less 
real form of the more difficult absorption of the additional 
labouring population through the usual channels. 1 With 
the magnitude of social capital already functioning, and 
the decree of its increase, with the extension of the scale of 

1 The census of England and Wales shows : all persons employed in agriculture 
(landlords, farmers, gardeners, shepherds, &c, included): 1851, 2,011,447: 1861, 
1,924,110. Fall, 87,337. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 102,714 persons: 18G1, 
79,242. Silk weaving : 1851, 111,940 : 1861, 101,678. Calico-printing : 1851, 12.098 : 
1861, 12,556. A small rise that, in the face of the enormous extension of this indus- 
try and implying a great fall proportionally in the number of labourers employed. 
Hat-making: 1851, 15,957: 1861, 13,814. Straw-hat and bonnet-making: 1851, 
20,393: 1861, 18,176. Malting: 1851, 10,566: 1861, 10,677. Chandlery, 1851, 
4949 : 1861, 46S6. This fall is due, besides other causes, to the increase in lighting 
by gas. Comb-making: 1851, 2,038: 1S61, 1,478. Sawyers: 1851, 30,552: 1861, 
31,647 — -a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. Nail- 
making: 1851, 26,940: 1861, 26,130— fall in consequence of the competition of 
machinery. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360: 1861, 32,041. On the other 
hand : Cotton-spinning and weaving : 1851, 371,777 : 1861, 456,646. Coal-mining : 
1851, 183,389: 1861, 246,613. "The increase of labourers is generally greatest, 
since 1851, in such branches of industry in which machinery has not up to the present 
been employed with success." (Census of England and Wales for 1862. Vol III. 
London, 1863, p. 36.) 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 645 

taction, and the mass of the laboui :i, with 

the development of the productiv< ir labour, with the 

greater breadth and fulness of all b >ui b, thei 

also an extension of the bcale on which greater attraction of 
labourei sapital La accompanied by their greater repulsion ; 

the rapidity of the change in the organic composition of 
capital, and in its technical form in ad an increasing 

number of Bphei production becomes involved in this 

change, now simultaneously, now alternately. The labouring 
Papulation therefore produces, along with the accumulation of 
capita] produced by it, the means by which i: 
latively superfluous, Lb burned into a 1 Burplus population; 

and it does this to an always inci .' This La b law 

of population peculiar! pitalist mode of production; 

and in i dal historic mode of production fa >wu 

:iaJ laws of population, historically valid within its limit> 
alone. An abstract law of population r plant- and 

animals Only, and only ii. j M man ha 

with th( m. 

1 «••] 

ral in Mm 

a ull tin. . Hi'l' ad, . 

of l.l' 

• 

Wear* a la 

1 is at 
loaat a hun<lre<l, probal 

I . ' I 1 \ ml tlf [1 

thooattiit time* le*a . . tha wh annual I 

1 

1 

I 1 in f 1 81 7 , pp. 1 6, 

creaiM y may i 

.IM llf I .lj.il II ] * ill I) 

I I 

may » UBfi I Lfl I 

1 

more ' I baooaaaa mora pl«ntil 

.•■it of the grnrra' 
I mentation, thef. ' nation. t 

oumct in Ui. profreM of an 

llam*ay, t. c. , | ■ j » 



646 Capitalist Production. 

But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product 
of accumulation or of the development of wealth on a capitalist 
basis, this surplus population becomes, conversely, the lever of 
capitalistic accumulation, nay, a condition of existence of the 
capitalist mode of production. It forms a disposable industrial 
reserve army, that belongs to capital quite as absolutely as 
if the latter had bred it at its own cost. Independently of the 
limits of the actual increaseof population, it creates, for the chang- 
ing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human 
material always ready for exploitation. With accumulation, 
and the development of the productiveness of labour that accom- 
panies it, the power of sudden expansion of capital grows also ; 
it grows, not merely because the elasticity of the capital already 
functioning increases, not merely because the absolute wealth 
of society expands, of which capital only forms an elastic part, 
not merely because credit, under every special stimulus, at once 
places an unusual part of this wealth at the disposal of produc- 
tion in the form of additional capital ; it grows, also, because 
the technical conditions of the process of production them- 
selves — machinery, means of transport, &c. — now admit of the 
rapidest transformation of masses of surplus product into addi- 
tional means of production. The mass of social wealth, over- 
flowing with the advance of accumulation, and transformable 
into additional capital, thrusts itself frantically into old 
branches of production, whose market suddenly expands, or 
into newly formed branches, such as railways, &c, the need for 
which grows out of the development of the old ones. In all 
such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great 
masses of men suddenly on the decisive points without injury 
to the scale of production in other spheres. Over-population 
supplies these masses. The course characteristic of modern 
industry, viz., a decennial cycle (interrupted by smaller oscil- 
lations), of periods of average activity, production at high 
pressure, crisis and stagnation, depends on the constant forma- 
tion, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the 
industrial reserve army or surplus population. In their turn, 
the varying phases of the industrial cycle recruit the surplus 
population, and become one of the most energetic agents of its 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, 647 

reproduction. This peculiar course of modern industry, which 

ocean in no earlier period of human history, was also iur 
lible in the childhood of capitalist production. The composition 
of capital changed but very slowly. With its accumula- 
tion, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding 

vth in the demand for labour. Slow as was tie- advance 

of accumulation compared with that of more modern kin 

it found a check in the natural limits of the exploit 
labouring population, limits which could only be '_ r "t rid of by 
forcible means to be mentioned later. The expansion by fits 
and starts of the icale of production is the preliminary to its 
equally sudden contraction ; tin- latter again evokes the former, 
hut the former is impossible without disposable human 
material, without an in<-: in the number of laboui 

independently of the absolute growth of the population. This 
mere ted by the simple pi itantly " 

a ['art of the lahourers ; by methods which !• n the 

number ol labourers employed in proportion to the ina 
production The whole form of the movement of modern in- 
da try depends, therefore, upon the constant transformation of 
rt of the labouring population int < ► unemployed or half- 
employed ban The nperficiality of Political Economy 
shov. fin the fad thai it looki upon the expansion and 

■1 of credit, which ia a mere tym] I f the ; 
chai the industrial cycle, as their c \ the heavenly 

hodies, one- tlnown into a certain definite motion, alu 

it with is soon as it 

thrown into this movemei 

Ktfert.s, in their turn. h<T(»nn- caiiM-s, anil t! 
of the \vlmlr [ip'ivss, which alu a; 

odition I 1 on the form of periodicity. When thin 

■dieit\ Political "\ then 

^e.-s thai B surplus populat ion 

HUrpllls \n it h iv '.nd ' f the 

a n. ••■ t" mod. rn indusi 

1 1 M.r i\ :d<-, I". >i in. r l\ l'i 

y em ploy < d in tl lish 

miiil ' pose that, on tho occa. 



648 Capitalist Production. 

crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the effort of getting 
rid by emigration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous 
arms, what would be the consequence ? That, at the first 
returning demand for labour, there would be a deficiency. 
However rapid reproduction may be, it takes, at all events, the 
space of a generation to replace the loss of adult labour. Now, 
the? profits of our manufacturers depend mainly on the power 
of making use of the prosperous moment when demand is 
brisk, and thus compensating themselves for the interval dur- 
ing which it is slack. This power is secured to them only by 
the command of machinery and of manual labour. They mutt 
have hands ready by them, they must be able to increase the 
activity of their operations when required, and to slacken it 
again, according to the state of the market, or they cannot 
possibly maintain that pre-eminence in the race of competition 
on which the wealth of the country is founded." 1 Even Mal- 
thus recognises over-population as a necessity of modern in- 
dustry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it by the 
absolute over-growth of the labouring population, not by their 
becoming relatively supernumerary. He says : " Prudential 
habits with regard to marriage, carried to a considerable extent 
among the labouring class of a country mainly depending upon 
manufactures and commerce, might injure it. ... From the 
nature of a population, an increase of labourers cannot be 
brought into market in consequence of a particular demand till 
after the lapse of 16 or 18 years, and the conversion of revenue 
into capital, by saving, may take place much more rapidly ; a 
country is always liable to an increase in the quantity of the 
funds for the maintenance of labour faster than the increase of 
population." 2 After Political Economy has thus demonstrated 
the constant production of a relative surplus-population of 
labourers to be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, she very 
aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of her 

1 H. Merivale : " Lectures on Colonization and Colonies, 1841." Vol. I., p. 146. 

2 Malthus. "Principles of Political Economy," pp. 254, 319, 320. In this work, 
Malthus finally discovers, with the help of Sismondi, the beautiful Trinity of capital- 
istic production : over-production, over-population, over-consumption — three very 
delicate monsters, indeed. Cf. F. Engels. " Umrisse zu einer Kritik der National- 
Oekonomie," I.e., p. 107, et seq. 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 649 

an ideal " of a capitalist the followu 1 to 

ie supernumeraries thrown on I 
tion of additional capital: — "We mai 
we can for you, whil increasing that capital on which 

you uiii-t mbsist, and you most <1<> t) 

ir numbers . ' * 

d by co d :' with 

the quantity sble labour-poweT which the natural 

' population yields It requii 
industrial army independent of these natural limit 

( 'p to thu p rinl ii the in or 

diminution of the variable capital ponds rigidly with 

diminution of the number of labourer! cin - 

The numberoflal mmanded by capital may remain 

the • n fall, while the variable capital iw 

This is the if the individual labourer yields more lal 

and tbi an 1 this although the 1 

remain I raven Calls, only more slowly than 

I : s ariahlc capital, in I 

• lab >ui 
It i • »lute i! pitalisi 

of lal than 

number of lab same 

In f • he Outlay Of :isi-s in 

• lah- 1, n . in ■ mer 

that in- lUCb Snmlh r 1 h«- mm 1 1 1 « - ^< ;i! 

I lucl ion, 1 1 Its furcf ii »\ith 

cumulation oi il. 

Wc ha\ • tin? ilcvclopi ipitalUi m 

1 of the prod 
• • and the capitalist, u itli 

ame « ■ ■ ■ ^t in ad ion d 

in 

lual ! 

buys with the same capital ■ greater mass 

MancliNter SlrU 



650 Capitalist Production. 

less skilled, mature labour-power by immature, male by female, 
that of adults by that of young persons or children. 

On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumula- 
tion, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action with- 
out enlisting more labourers ; on the other, a variable capital 
of the same magnitude sets in action more labour with the 
same mass of labour-power ; and, finally, a greater number of 
inferior labour-powers by displacement of higher. 

The production of a relative surplus-population, or the set- 
ting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly than 
the technical revolution of the process of production that ac- 
companies, and is accelerated by, the advance of accumulation; 
and more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of 
the variable part of capital as compared with the constant. 
If the means of production, as they increase in extent and 
effective power, become to a less extent means of employment 
of labourers, this state of things is again modified by the 
fact that in proportion as the productiveness of labour increases, 
capital increases its supply of labour more quickly than its de- 
mand for labourers. The over- work of the employed part of 
the working class swells the ranks of the reserve, whilst con- 
versely the greater pressure that the latter by its competition 
exerts on the former, forces these to submit to over- work and 
to subjugation under the dictates of capital. The condemnation 
of one part of the working-class to enforced idleness by the 
over-work of the other part, and the converse, becomes a means 
of enriching the individual capitalists, 1 and accelerates at the 

1 Even in the cotton famine of 18G3 we find, in a pamphlet of the operative cotton- 
spinners of Blackburn, fierce denunciations of overwork, which, in consequence of 
the Factory Acts, of course only effected adult male labourers. " The adult operatives 
at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 13 hours per day, while there are 
hundreds who are compelled to be idle who would willingly work partial time, in 
order to maintain their families and save their brethren from a premature grave 
through being overworked . . . We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice 
of working overtime by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between 
masters and servants. Those who are worked overtime feel the injustice equally 
with those who are condemned to forced idleness. There is in the district almost 
sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly distributed. We are only 
asking what is right in requesting the masters generally to pursue a system of short 
hours, particularly until a better state of things begins to dawn upon us, rather than 
to work a portion of the hands overtime, while others, for want of work, are com- 



The General Law of Capitalist Acctunulation. 65 r 

same time the production of the industrial 1 
a scale corresponding with the advance of social accumu- 
lation. Bow important Lb this • .t in the formation 
the relative surplus-population, Lb shown by tl. »]»le of 

England. Ber I chnical means for saving labour are c >l<>ssal. 
if to-morrow morning labour generally w 

reduced to a rational amount^and proportioned to tl. rent 

: • working-class according I 1 age and sex, the 
rking population i<> band would be absolutely insufficient 
Cor the carrying 00 of national production on its pre* w * 
The great majority of the labourers now "unproductive" would 
have to be turned i r it<» "productive" on 

king tli- m as a whole, I nt - of wages are 

exclusively regulated 1 ion and contraction of the 

indu ti ial • e army, and tl, ad to the 

periodic changes of the industrial cycle. Tl 
not determined I nations of the 1 ; >lute numbei 

ition, but by the varying proportion* 
which I >rking class is divided in1 

army, by the incn or diminution in the relative amount 

>pulation, by tli.- extent to which it is now ab- 
icrbed, now >• t t'i- I' : \l i m Iu'lustry with its decani 
oycks ami )>• which, mori cumulation 

by irregular oscillations following 
and more quickly, tl >uld indeed l>e a 

• 

of ili- n, in^' 

• he demand and supply of labour by th< 
I contraction >ital, the Ial 

app< full, 1 ipital 

■ 

Tmdt n I nereo" gra«; 

••mployed labourer* with I 
thrr auto of i«llcn< ■» in t)>i« king'lnm It 1 
r of Ut-"irinf h«ml< Wh«nr^ 

* n oonnw) ur no«' 
will niakr tin ir rn»«t. r I inutii 

f thfiM pco|>! 'i tuoh omw ■ 

I 

■ ■ 



652 Capitalist Production, 

now again over-full, because it is contracting. Yet this is the 
dogma of the economists. According to them, wages rise in con- 
sequence of accumulation of capital. The higher wages stimulate 
the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this 
ofoes on until the labour-market becomes too full, and therefore 
capital, relatively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient. 
Wages fall, and now we have the reverse of the medal. The 
working population is little by little decimated as the result 
of the fall in wages, so that capital is again in excess rela- 
tively to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and 
the corresponding increase in the exploitation of the labourer 
again accelerates accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the 
lower wages hold the increase of the working-class in check. 
Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less 
than the demand, wages rise, and so on. A beautiful mode of 
motion this for developed capitalist production ! Before, in 
consequence of the rise of wages, any positive increase of the 
population really fit for work could occur, the time would 
have been passed again and again, during which the industrial 
campaign must have been carried through, the battle fought 
and won. 

Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignifi- 
cant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took place in 
the English agricultural districts. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly 
wages rose from 7s. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from 7s. or 8s., to 9s., 
&c. This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricul- 
tural surplus-population caused by the demands of war, the 
vast extension of railroads, factories, mines, &c. The lower the 
wages, the higher is the proportion in which ever so insignifi- 
cant a rise of them expresses itself. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 
20s. and it rises to 22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent. ; but if it 
is only 7s. and it rises to 9s., that is a rise of 28y per cent., 
which sounds very fine. Everywhere the farmers were howl- 
ing, and the " London Economist," with reference to these 
starvation- wages, prattled quite seriously of " a general and 
substantial advance." 1 What did the farmers do now ? Did 
they wait until, in consequence of this brilliant remuneration, 

1 Economist. Jan. 21. 1860. 



7 he General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, 65 






the agricultural labourers had so increased and multiplied I 
their v. must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic 

economic brain 1 They introduced more machinery, and in 1 
moment the labourers were redundant again in a pr ; 
tion satisfactory even to the farmers. Th . <•<■- more 

capital " laid out in agriculture than before, and in a D 
productive form. With this the demand for labour f< 
only n !y. but absolutely. 

Th*- ftboi nomic fiction confuses the laws thai 

general movement of wages, or I bo the 

working — i.a, the total labour-power— and the I 1 

tocial capital, with the laws that distribute the working p 

the different spheres of produ &i >n It', '■.</. in c 
sequi irable circumstance imulation in a parti- 

cular sphere of pi >n becoi pecially active, and 

profit* in it, being r than the average profit ttract 

additional capital, of course the demand for Labour rises and 
The higher wages draw a larger part of the 
working population into the m re Eavoured sphere, until it La 
glutted with labour-power, and wag • th tall again to 

their a. level or below it, if the pressure is 1 

Then, not only does th.- immigration of labourers into the 
branch of industry in question c it gives place I 

emigration. I the political economist think the 

why and wh< II dute in.-i 

of u ; i diminati. n of l 

mpanying an ab 1 >f lab ►uren 1 kit he 

really only the local oscillation ot the labour-market in a 

• iculai of |iri»«lui-t i< 'ii h In- plii'iioii 

1 he arorking population into 

(In; dill "t i*a| : ding tO it \ 

• imlii anal 1 mv, during the pel ioda 

and a\ • tive laboui 

• h: ri 1 

. populal ion 1- t In 
the pivot upon which the law ..f lemand and 

1 



654 Capitalist Production. 

the limits absolutely convenient to the activity of exploitation 
and to the domination of capital. 

This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of 
economic apologetics. It will be remembered that if through 
the introduction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a 
portion of variable capital is transformed into constant, the 
economic apologist interprets this operation which " fixes " 
capital and by that very act set labourers " free," in exactly 
the opposite way, pretending that it sets free capital for the 
labourers. Only now can one fully understand the effrontery 
of these apologists. What are set free are not only the 
labourers immediately turned out by the machines, but also 
their future substitutes in the rising generation, and the addi- 
tional contingent, that with the usual extension of trade on 
the old basis would be regularly absorbed. They are now 
all "set free," and every new bit of capital looking out for 
employment can dispose of them. Whether it attracts them 
or others, the effect on the general labour demand will be nil, 
if this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as 
many labourers as the machines threw upon it. If it employs 
a smaller number, that of the supernumeraries increases ; if it 
employs a greater, the general demand for labour only in- 
creases to the extent of the excess of the employed over those 
" set free." The impulse that additional capital, seeking an 
outlet, would otherwise ha\e given to the general demand for 
labour, is therefore in every case neutralised to the extent of 
the labourers thrown out of employment by the machine. 
That is to say, the mechanism of capitalistic production so 
manages matters that the absolute increase of capital is accom- 
panied by no corresponding rise in the general demand for 
labour. And this the apologist calls a compensation for the 
misery, the su tie rings, the possible death of the displaced 
labourers during the transition period that banishes them into 
the industrial reserve army ! The demand for labour is not 
identical with increase of capital, nor supply of labour with 
increase of the working class. It is not a case of two inde- 
pendent forces working on one another. Les dds sont pipe's. 
Capital works on both sides at the same time. If its accumu- 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, I 

lation, on the one hand, increases the demand for labour, it in- 
creases on the other the supply of labourers by the "setting 
free " of thern, whilst at the same time the pressure of the un- 
employed compels those that are employed to furnish more 
labour, and therefore makes the supply of labour, to a certain 
extent, independent of tbe supply of labourers. The action of 
the law of supply and demand of labour on this basis com- 
pletes the despotism of capital As soon, therefore, as the 
labourers learn the secret, how it comes to pass that in the 
ham*- measure as they work m< they produce more wealth 

for others, and as the productive power of their labour inci 
so in the same measure even their function as a means of the 
Belf-expansion of capital becomes more and more precarious for 
them ; a d as they discover that the degree of intensity of 
the competition among themselves depends wholly on the 

of the relative surplus-population; Bfl BOOU as, by 

Trades' Unions, fee., they try to organise a regular co-op. •ration 
between employed and unemployed in order to de troy or 

to weaken the ruinous effects of this natural law of capi- 
talistic production on their cl on capital and il 
pliant, political economy, cry <>ut at the infringement of the 
rnal " I " law of snpply and demand, 
ibination of employed and unemployed disturbs the 
"harmoni Aion of this law, But, <»n the other b 
soon as in circumstano rent 
the i d of an industrial n i rve army and, with it, the 
solute dependence of the working class upon the capitalist 
'la , capital, along with mmonplace Sancho I' i bels 

apply and demand, and tri< 

in- 
to* L I'lFFEUENT FOIIMM OF THE | I M Kilt l-FOl 
1 1 1 , U. LAW (iK n 

T! surplus popul.it i Ls in every | f rin. 

i 

<lly U] 



656 Capitalist Production* 

account the great periodically recurring forms that the chang- 
ing phases of the industrial cycle impress on it, now an acute 
form during the crisis, then again a chronic form during dull 
times— it has always three forms, the floating, the latent, the 
stagnant. 

In the centres of modern industry — factories, manufactures, 
ironworks, mines, $zc. — the labourers are sometimes repelled, 
sometimes attracted again in greater masses, the number of those 
employed increasing on the whole, although in a constantly 
decreasing proportion to the scale of production. Here the 
surplus population exists in the floating form. 

In the automatic factories, as in all the great workshops, 
where machinery enters as a factor, or where only the modern 
division of labour is carried out, large numbers of boys are 
employed up to the age of maturity. When this term is 
once reached, only a very small number continue to find em- 
ployment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority 
are regularly discharged. This majority forms an element of the 
floating surplus-population, growing with the extension of 
those branches of industry. Part of them emigrates, following 
in fact capital that has emigrated. Oue consequence is that 
the female population grows more rapidly than the male, teste 
England. That the natural increase of the number of labourers 
does not satisfy the requirements of the accumulation of 
capital, and yet all the time is in excess of them, is a contra- 
diction inherent to the movement of capital itself. It wants 
larger numbers of youthful labourers, a smaller number of 
adults. The contradiction is not more glaring than that other 
one that there is a complaint of the want of hands, while at 
the same time many thousands are out of work, because 
the division of labour chains them to a particular branch of 
industry. 1 

The consumption of labour-power by capital is, besides, so 

1 Whilst during the last six months of I860, 80-00,000 working people in London 
were thrown out of work, the Factory Report for that same half year says : "It does 
not appear absolutely true to say that demand will always produce supply just at the 
moment when it is needed. It has not done so with labour, for much machinery has 
been idle last year for want of hands." (Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1806, 
p. 81.) 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 657 

rapid that the labourer, half-way through his life, has already 
more or less completely lived himself out. He falls into the 
ranks of the supernumeraries, or is thrust down from ;t higher 
to a lower step in the seale. It is precisely among the work- 
people of modern industry that we meet with the short 
duration of life. L)r. Lee, Medical Officer of Health fur Man- 
chester, stated "that the average a^ r e at death of the Man- 
chester .... upper middle' class was 38 years, while the 
average age at death of the labouring class was 17 ; while at 
Liverpool those figures were represented as 35 against 15. V 
thus appeared that the well-to-do classes had a lease of life which 
was more than double the value of that which fell to the lot of 

the less favoured citizens." 1 In order to conform to th< 
circumstances, the absolute increase of this section of the 
proletariat must take place under conditions that shall Bwell 
their aumbers, although the individual elements are used 
up rapidly. Hence, rapid renewal of the generations of 
labourers this law does not hold for the other classes of the 
population . This Bocial need is met by early marriages, a 
nece arj [uence of the conditions in which the labourers 

of modem industry live, and by the premium that the exploita- 
tion of children sets on their production. 

A pitalist production tai. a of b 

culture, and in proportion to the extent to which it d 
the demand for an agricultural labouring population falls 
.. while the accumulation of the capital employed in 
agriculture advances, without this repulsion in uon- 

agricultural industries, compensated by a ttraction. 

Tart ■ cultural population is th instantly on 

the point of | ovei into an urban or manulart 1111: 

prol( bariat, and on the look-oui I 1 circum I 

to th ' -niiat ion. ( M , m t be 

of all Don iltmal industrii Th 

'Op 

.1 < 

I f.-r K, . "cut.. 

na wero<li»tiugui*)ic«l Latton n 

l:ut wl.ii ib«c(|uout tvn jro 



658 Capitalist Production. 

surplus-population is thus constantly flowing. But the con- 
stant flow towards the towns presupposes, in the country itself, 
a constant latent surplus-population, the extent of which 
becomes evident only when its channels of outlet open to 
exceptional width. The agricultural labourer is therefore 
reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one 
foot already in the swamp of pauperism. 

The third category of the relative surplus -population, the 
stagnant, forms a part of the active labour army, but with 
extremely irregular employment. Hence it furnishes to capital 
an inexhaustible reservoir of disposable labour-power. Its 
conditions of life sink below the average normal level of the 
working class ; this makes it at once the broad basis of special 
branches of capitalist exploitation. It is characterized by 
maximum of working time, and minimum of wages. We have 
learnt to know its chief form under the rubric of "domestic 
industry." It recruits itself constantly from the supernumerary 
forces of modern industry and agriculture, and specially from 
those decaying branches of industry where handicraft is yielding 
to manufacture, manufacture to machinery. Its extent grows, 
as with the extent and energy of accumulation, the creation of 
a surplus population advances. But it forms at the same time 
a self-reproducing and self-perpetuating element of the 
working class, taking a proportionally greater part in the 
general increase of that class than the other elements. In fact, 
not only the number of births and deaths, but the absolute size 
of the families stand in inverse proportion to the height of 
wages, and therefore to the amount of means of subsistence of 
which the different categories of labourers dispose. This law 
of capitalistic society would sound absurd to savages, or even 
civilized colonists. It calls to mind the boundless reproduction 
of animals individually weak and constantly hunted down. 1 

the villages and the country increased half a million, the population in the 580 towns 
increased by a million and a half (1,554,067). The increase of the population of the 
country parishes is 6'5 percent., and of the towns 17'3 per cent. The difference in 
the rates of increase is due to the migration from country to town. Three-fourths of 
the total increase of population has taken place in the towns. (Census, &c, pp. 
Hand 12.) 

1 "Poverty seems favourable to generation." (A. Smith.) This is even a specially 
wise arrangement of God, according to the gallant and witty Abbe Galiani. "Iddio 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 659 

The lowest sediment of the relative surplus-population 
finally dwells in the sphere of pauperism. Exclusive of v 
bonds, criminals, prostitutes, in award, the "dangerous " clac 
this layer of society consists of three categories, First, v. 
able to work. One need only glance superficially at the 
»£ English pauperism to find that the quantity of 
paupera increases with every crisis, and diminishes with «•• 
revival of trad.-. ad, orphans and pauper children. These 

candidates for the Industrial reserve-army, and are, in times 
real prosperity, as I860, <.'/., speedily and in large numbers 
■enrolled in the active army of labourers. Third, the de- 
moralized and ragged, and those unable work, chiefly people 
1 succumb to their Incapacity tot adaptation, due* to the 

division of labour; people who have passed the normal 

of the labourer; the victims of industry, whose number 

inn-' with the iniTt-aso of dangerous machinery, of 

mines, chemical works, fco, the mutilated, the sickly, the 
wi<l Pauperism is the hospital of the active labour- 

army and the dead weight of the industrial reserve-army. \i> 

taction is included in that of the relative surplus-popula- 
tion, ii in tin along with th< surplus-population, 
pauperi edition of capitalist production, and of the 
capitalist development of wealth. It enters into the ) 
/ pitalist production ; but capital knows how to thi 
the e, for the mo I | boulders on to thoa 
tie- vrorkhi 1 and the lower middle .lass. 
Th .t. or tli> th, the ranctioning capital, the 

nt and energy of i( .0 • .. th, and, tic aU<> the absolute 

man proletariat and the productm-n the 

the industrial .-•-army. The sum' caiiM's which 

lope the capital, devcl lso the 

I disposal Tl, 1 • ive mam of fche indus- 

I ■ army ijkt. a>i-s th with the 

of vreall h But t • army in ] n t<» 

mMtiori dl prima utilitA iimcdiio ibboi 
",%.ty up to tho aitrvmo point o4 famine kikI |»oaUlenoo* 

Iaing : rtts, 

-Ung b«l .<•». he continue- I 

people wore all in «uy 






660 Capitalist Production. 

the active labour-army, the greater is the mass of a consolidated 
surplus-population, whose misery is in inverse ratio to its- 
torment of labour. The more extensive, finally, the lazurus- 
layers of the working-class, and the industrial reserve-army, 
the greater is official pauperism. This is the absolute general 
law of capitalist accumulation. Like all other laws it is 
modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis 
of which does not concern us here. 

The folly is now patent of the economic wisdom that 
preaches to the labourers the accommodation of their number to 
the requirements of capital. The mechanism of capitalist pro- 
duction and accumulation constantly effects this adjustment. 
The first word of this adaptation is the creation of a relative 
surplus-population, or industrial reserve-army. Its last word 
is the misery of constantly extending strata of the active army 
of labour, and the dead weight of pauperism. 

The law by which a constantly increasing quantity of means 
of production, thanks to the advance in the productiveness of 
social labour, may be set in movement by a progressively 
diminishing expenditure of human power, this law, in a 
capitalist society — where the labourer does not employ the 
means of production, but the means of production employ the 
labourer — undergoes a complete inversion and is expressed thus; 
the higher the productiveness of labour, the greater is the 
pressure of the labourers on the means of employment, the more 
precarious, therefore, becomes their condition of existence, viz,, 
the sale of their own labour-power for the increasing of another's 
wealth, or for the self-expansion of capital. The fact that the 
means of production, and the productiveness of labour, increase 
mere rapidly than the productive population, expresses itself, 
therefore, capitalistically in the inverse form that the labouring 
population always increases more rapidly than the conditions 
under which capital can employ this increase for its own self- 
expansion. 

We saw in Part IV., when analysing the production of rela- 
tive surplus- value : within the capitalist system all methods 
for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought 
about at the cost of the individual labourer ; all means 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. <i 

for the development of production transform the into 

i domination over, and exploitation of, the i >rs; 

mutilate the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade 

liiui to the level of an append a machine, destroy every 

remnant "1" charm in his work and turn it into a hated toil; 

they estrange from him the intellectual potentialities of the 

in uli*- Bame proportion as Bcience is incorpor- 

in it as an independant power ; they distort the condi- 
tiona under which be works, subject him during the labour- 
proc< itism the more hateful for it- meanness; they 

transform his life-time into working-time, and drag his wife 
and child beneath the wheels of tl gernaut of capital But 

all methods forthe production of surplus-value are at the Bame 
time methods of accumulation ; and every extension 
cumulation 1 gain ■ means for the development I 

tli<>>'- nH'thoil it follows therefore that in proportion as 
Capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer, be his payment high 
tr low, must grow v. The law, finally, that alv. qui- 

Hbrates the relative surplus-population, or industrial reserve 
prmy, to tl I otandei ^cumulation, this law it 

the labourer to capital more firmly than tl 
<li«l Promethei ck. It emulation 

M D ponding With aiviinnilat \ 

cumulation of weall li at on me time 

imulation of m f toil, >]-.. ignorance, 

brutality, mental degradation, at th< pole, > >•.. on the 

si<l«- i if i t pi-mi ui) product in the fi inn of 

tal. 
Tl ocumulation 1 is 

enunciated in political econom 

them il with phenomena, oertainlj me 

ir il <l«\j«nt ilmir plui cl&if qtl« !«•■ ru\ 
1 irgcoUic n'ont |hm uii raracU V . <*r»ctoi mat* 

!*!>■ 1m tndn> 
• .. U tl y ■ 

y m una f ore© pr« ►■ 

Hnm <!• U cUm« 
MWgl •>!»••, .jn'ifi arn .hi' - i •.•...;.• . • • i. i.t U 1 1. \. • •« .li« in. n.t.f. • ut- f|*nt* ..•■ 



662 Capitalist Production. 

extent analogous, but nevertheless essentially distinct, and be- 
longing to precapitalistic modes of production. 

The Venetian monk Ortes, one of the great economic writers 
of the 18th century, regards the antagonism of capitalist pro- 
duction as a general natural law of social wealth. " In the 
economy of a nation, advantages and evils always balance one 
another (il bene ed il male economico in una nazione sempre 
all, istessa misura) : the abundance of wealth with some people, 
is always equal to the want of it with others (la copia dei 
beni in alcuni sempre eguale alia mancanza di essi in altri) : 
the great riches of a small number are always accompanied by 
the absolute privation of the first necessaries of life for many 
others. The wealth of a nation corresponds with its popu- 
lation, and its misery corresponds with its wealth. Diligence 
in some compels idleness in others. The poor and idle are a 
necessary consequence of the rich and active," &C. 1 In 
a thoroughly brutal way about 10 years after Ortes, the 
Church of England parson, Townsend, glorified misery as a ne- 
cessary condition of wealth. " Legal constraint (to labour) is 
attended with too much trouble, violence, and noise, .... 
whereas hunger is not only a peaceable, silent, unremitted 
pressure, but as the most natural motive to industry and 
labour, it calls forth the most powerful exertions." Everything 
therefore depends upon making hunger permanent among the 
working class, and for this, according to Townsend, the prin- 
ciple of population, especially active among the poor, provides. 
"It seems to be a law of nature that the poor should be 
to a certain degree improvident" [i.e. so improvident as to 
be born without a silver spoon in the mouth], " that there 
ma} r always be some to fulfil the most servile, the most sordid, 
and the most ignoble offices in the community. The stock of 
human happiness is thereby much increased, whilst the more 
delicate are not only relieved from drudgery. . . . but are 
left at liberty without interruption to pursue those callings 



1 G. Ortes : Delia Econoraia Nazionale libri sei, 1777, in Custodi, Parte Moderna, 
t. xxi, pp. 6, 9, 22, 25, etc. Ortes says, 1. c, p. 32 : "In luoco di progettar sistemi 
inutili per la felicita de'popoli, mi limitero a investigare la ragione della loro in- 
felicita." 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 663 

which are suited to their various dispositions it 

[the Poor Law] tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the 
.symmetry and order of that system which God and Nature 
have established in the world." 1 If the Venetian monk found 
in the fatal destiny that makes misery eternal, ti, 1 

of Christian charity, celibacy, monasteries and holy houses, the 
Protestant prebendary finds in it a pretext for condemning tin- 
laws in virtue of which the poor pot I a right to a miser- 
able public relief. 

"Tin- p r ogr e s s of social wealth," says Storch, "begets this 
nsefn] class of society . . . which performs the most weari- 
some, the vilest, the most disgusting functions, which takes, in 

a word, on it^ shoulders all that is disagreeable ami servile in 

life, and procures thus for other clashes leisure, serenity of 
mind and conventional [e'est bon!] dignity of charact 

rch asks him-. If in what then really consist the 1 
of this capitalistic civilisation with Its misery and it- degrada- 
tion of the* masses, as compared with barbarism tie finds 

but one iiihwvr : security ! 

"Thanks t<> the advance of Industry and science, 
Bismondi, "every labourer can produce r\ny day much more 

than hi imption ivijuin-s. Hut at the >ame time, whilst 

his labour pru. luces wealth, that wealth would, Were he Called 

00 to consume It himself) make him less fit for labou Ac 

■ him, "men" [/.*., non-workers] "would probably 
r to do without all artistic | tion, and all the enjoy- 
ment ' manuiactui if it were ncce»arv 
that all should buv them b\ \\ like that of 

1 A DiMcrtation or. t t* By a of Hauikil K« \ . ■'. 

I nd. 1-17. ]■]'. I"-, ."■'.'. II. Micato" paj 

wlii.nr work junt q throiiK'i. 

coptea whole page*, himtel- 1 the greater part of Inn 

from Sir .linnet BttOtrt, whom he boWtW alt« r» irt tin- b<M when 

Sliwrt my* : M V. -v. v%nK a forcible m< ti of makinf mankind dili 

r»J 
. " iM:caim«' tlii-y Wa taVraa ol . mm an i.r., 

rt] " bat mat tlavea of tl.. 

doee not thence conclude ID ler of hencnoea, that the wage- lain, 

alwaya go f»»t H «lahet,on the contrary, to increaac their want* ai -the 

incrr.v nl» r of their wanU a ■titnulu* >re delicate." 



664 Capitalist Production. 

labourer. . . . Exertion to-day is separated from its re- 
compense ; it is not the same man that first works, and then 
reposes ; but it is because the one works that the other rests. 
. . . The indefinite multiplication of the productive powers 
of labour can then only have for result the increase of luxury 
and enjoyment of the idle rich." 1 

Finally Destutt de Tracy, the fish-blooded bourgeois 
doctrinaire, blurts out brutally : "In poor nations the people 
are comfortable, in rich nations they are generally poor." 2 

SECTION 5. — ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERAL LAW OF CAPITALIST 

ACCUMULATION. 

(a.) England from 1846-1866. 

No period of modern society is so favourable for the study of 
capitalist accumulation as the period of the last 20 years. It 
is as if this period had found Fortunatus' purse. But of all 
countries England again furnishes the classical example, because 
it holds the foremost place in the world-market, because capi- 
talist production is here alone completely developed, and lastly, 
because the introduction of the Free Trade millennium since 
1846 has cut off the last retreat of vulgar economy. The titanic 
advance of production — the latter half of the 20 years period 
again far surpassing the former — has been already pointed out 
sufficiently in Part IV. 

Although the absolute increase of the English population in 
the last half century was very great, the relative increase or rate 
of growth fell constantly, as the following table borrowed from 
the census shows. 

Annual increase per cent, of the population of England and 
Wales in decimal numbers : 

1811-1821 1-533 per cent. 

1821-1831 1-446 „ 

1831-1841 1-326 

1841-1851 1-216 

1851-1861 1-141 

1 Sismondi 1. c. pp. 79, 80, 85. 

2 Destutt de Tracy, 1. c. p. 231 : "Les nations pauvres, c'est la ou le peuple est a 
son aise ; et les nations riches, c'est la ou il est ordiiiairement pauvre." 



The General Law of Capitalist A ccumulaix 

Let as now, on the other hand, consid 
wealth. Bere the movement of profit, rent of land 
eome under the income tax, rurnisln 
incn F profits liable to inccm< b and some other 

• included] In < treat Britain from I v ! 
amounted to 50*47 or \ " s aa the annual i 
the population during t) me period to about 12 
augmentation of the rent of land subjed cation Lnclud 

houses, railways, mines, fishei amoun 

1864 ' ,,r •'»,'. annually. Under this head the follow 

show the gn 

I n of annual inoom I creaae per year. 

II 

V ^ 17,i /o 7: 

Mines, 68-85% 

Iron-works, 3D 

Fisheries, 57*87% 21 

i l 11-45 

B I 7 7 

1 1 mpare the \ • in tin 

■iitivc eh, tip 

m..- in« tantlv. h 

prof ■ I S to 1857 I 7: rlj . 1857 1 7*%, 

and foi 1861 irly. Tl ... • the 

United Kingdom thi '•-'• iin'Mim- tax wi> in I 

in 18/ £328,127,411 i 
1861 
The accumulation of ca] if •' n i 

titration and oentrali Although i 

r ti„. < ii m i 

r c«m|*n»<in. t«ut, ukrn »»»•«' 

cwm|>UiuU of the 

commercial a ■••..' A 

■ mi —hie profit ••!•*• the 

the? mn 



666 



Capitalist Production. 



statistics of agriculture existed for England (they did for Ireland), 
they were voluntarily given in 10 counties. These statistics 
gave the result that from 1851 to 1861 the number of farms of 
less than 100 acres had fallen from 31,583 to 26,597, so that 5016 
had been thrown together into larger farms. 1 From 1815 to 
1825 no personal estate of more than £1,000,000 came under the 
succession duty ; from 1825 to 1855, however, 8 did ; and 4 from 
1856 to June, 1859, i.e., in 4^ years. 2 The centralisation will r 
however, be best seen from a short analysis of the Income Tax 
Schedule D (profits, exclusive of farms, &c), in the years 1864* 
and 1865. I note beforehand that incomes from this source 
pay income tax on everything over £60. These incomes liable 
to taxation in England, Wales, and Scotland, amounted in 1864* 
to £95,844,222, in 1865 to £105,435,579. 3 The number of 
persons taxed were in 1864, 308,416, out of a population of 
23,891,009 ; in 1865, 332,431 out of a population of 24,127,003. 
The following table shows the distribution of these incomes in 
the two years : 



Year ending April 5te 


, 1864. 


Year ending April 5tb 


[, 1865. 


Income from profits. 


Persons. 


Income from Profits. 


Persons. 


Total Income £95,844,222 

of these 57,028,289 

„ 36,415,225 

„ 22,809,781 

„ 8,744,762 


308,416 

23,334 

3,619 

832 

91 


Total Income £105,435,738 

of these 64,554,297 

„ 42,535,576 

„ 27,555,313 

11,077,238 


332,431 

24,265 

4,021 

973 

107 



In 1855 there were produced in the United Kingdom 
61,453,079 tons of coal, of value £16,113,167; in 1864, 
92,787,873 tons, of value £23,197,968; in 1855, 3,218,154 tons 
of pig-iron, of value £8,045,385; 1864, 4,767,951 tons, of value 

1 Census, &c, 1. c, p. 29. John Bright's assertion that 150 landlords own half oi 
England, and 12 half the Scotch soil, has never been refuted. 
-Fourth Report, &c, of Inland Revenue. Lond., 1860, p. 17. 
3 These are the net incomes after certain legally authorized abatements. 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulat. 

£11,919,877. In UMH tin- length ofthe raOroa I in 

1 Kingdom was 8054 miles, with. tal of 

794; in 1864 the length was 12,789 m i, with 
capital j»ai«l np of £425,71 In 1854 the total sam 

and iinjH.rts of the 1 faited Kingdom v 1 0,1 15; 

in I The following table akoi 

mt-iit of Um ■ 

1 ■- 77 

184 •- 

l 115,826,948 

1- i:; 17 

l- [( 

L8( 1- '17 

Aft<-r \\. inplei one d f triumph 

of tin- i he British \ • idly as 

ti"ii has in-] not kept paoe with 

> "f iii'lu A wealth. *' * 

i. indoati the 

ptodoO ' hlS Wealth, r " It i 

Hm hi ktoret in the io rial - 1 oooni 

was a <lecrease in the i 
sum wen of tip' j 1 while t! II an m.-rease 

class an-'. 

tires, th.-ro was at the same tin. accumulal 

wealth in t!..- upper daasc int inrrease<'' 

,: t ' 

u I i, [841 <>n Aj nl 16th, can* lai 



llan and Chlneea market iii« a 
r,y the oone4«nm. .tieh cotton manufacturer. I : , r luction In 

of ft per o.nt. took plana nmoagat Um cotton operative* In 1H67, a* ooane- 
of a umilar opera tioo, there *»• i i 30,000 men at lYeeton. 

• :*ue,*c . I r . ,. 11 

ISIS, 
im of the meat melancholy featarea tn Um eontal • .weoaatr.T tUt »c 

eea, beyond Um |— •lUlity of denial. I moment a deer** 

tbcouneaminc i~ « t. f i .«»eeeane of the preeanre of priratione and die 

treee ; there U at the mom lime a eoaataat aoramulaUon of wealth la the apnar 
cUmti. »n incrrM- ■•> lameM of their habtu, and of their biwm of anjoy 

. . 



668 Capitalist Production. 

in the speech in which he introduced his Budget : '-From 1842 
to 1852 the taxable income of the country increased by 6 per 
cent In the 8 years from 1853 to 1861 it had in- 
creased from the basis taken in 1853 by 20 per cent ! The 
fact is so astonishing as to be almost incredible .... this 
intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power .... entirely 
confined to classes of property .... must be of indirect 
benefit to the labouring population, because it cheapens the 
commodities of general consumption. While the rich have been 
growing richer, the poor have been growing less poor. At any- 
rate, whether the extremes of poverty are less, I do not presume 
to say." 1 How lame an anti-climax ! If the working-class 
has remained " poor," only " less poor " in proportion as it 
produces for the wealthy class " an intoxicating augmentation 
of wealth and power," then it has remained relatively just as 
poor. If the extremes of poverty have not lessened, they have 
increased, because the extremes of wealth have. As to the 
cheapening of the means of subsistence, the official statistics, e.g., 
the accounts of the London Orphan Asylum, show an increase in 
price of 20% for the average of the three years 1860-1862^ 
compared with 1851-1853. In the following three years, 1863- 
1865, there was a progressive rise in the price of meat, butter, 
milk, sugar, salt, coals, and a number of other necessary means 
of subsistence. 2 Gladstone's next Budget speech of April 7th, 
1864, is a Pindaric dithyrambus on the advance of surplus-value- 
making and the happiness of the people tempered by "poverty." 
He speaks of masses " on the border " of pauperism, of branches 
of trade in which " wages have not increased," and finally sums 
up the happiness of the working class in the words : " human 
life is but, in nine cases out of ten, a struggle for existence." 3 

1 Gladstone in the House of Commons, April 16th, 1863. "Morning Star," 
April 17th. 

2 See the official accounts in the Blue Book : "Miscellaneous statistics of the United 
Kingdom," Part vi., London, 1866, pp. 260-273, passim. Instead of the statistics 
of orphan asylums, &c, the declamations of the ministerial journals in recommend- 
ing dowries for the Royal children might also serve. The greater dearness of the 
means of subsistence is never forgotten there. 

3 Gladstone, House of Commons, 7th April, 1864. — "The Hansard version runs : 
" Again, and yet more at large — what is human life, but, in the majority of cases, a 
struggle for existence." The continual crying contradictions in Gladstone's Budget 



Th G >f Capitalist Accumulation. I 

IV I rt, nut hound li 

'Jii-ily : "Id thai 

_.- haw I this in 

(in the last ten 3 bat thi 

iiiimy of tl 

in \.-tl . 
....•• the ) ic pidly richer, whilst then . 

• ible ftdi Mice in I 1 by the in . 

•••s .... They tl .■ 
ilai man, to w hom th»-\ ■ 

In tin- chapten on the "woi and " machin the 

-•■••n un«l»-r what circuinstaw 

mental tli and 

for the pi 

social ioning of thi 

a full elucidation of the li imolation, bii 

ide thi bop m I at, hia condition 1 

ad dwellii The limil 

chiefly frith the worst 1 
Kndusti ial : ad wii 

■ . • ■ 
1 1 one word fficial pau] 1 thai ■, 

tl»« .'■ In*.* u hich li 

ii public . 
official 
in I , , , , I 

: . 

I in till 

■jtrr. ).. « of ISO -»t. I ! - I «f| eharat t« nn-l l.y an Kn^li»i. » r » t - i !•> \\.< foUowiM 
" * mmo «orlTrt. II 1 

I 

fl*ftg» 4 I 

I 

< rfli^dtp«qd»oo« of kboorw* om ik» 

r*u»l •». i-w. . ; if immuhiiih of ih< ,«iwh1 

1 

.1* ber«U mlwmjn melu.M in Kn« 



670 Capitalist Production, 

populous than the kingdom of Scotland, an increase of pauperism 
for the year 1866 of 19*5% compared with 1865, and of 24'4% 
compared with 1864, and a still greater increase for the first 
months of 1867 as compared with 1866. From the analysis of 
the statistics of pauperism, two points are to be taken. On 
the one hand, the fluctuation up and down of the number of 
paupers, reflects the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. 
On the other, the official statistics become more and more mis- 
leading as to the actual extent of pauperism in proportion as, 
with the accumulation of capital, the class-struggle, and, there- 
fore, the class-consciousness of the working-men, develope. 
E.g., the barbarity in the treatment of the paupers, at which the 
English Press {The Times, Pall Mall Gazette, etc.) have cried 
out so loudly during the last two years, is of ancient date. 
F. Engels showed in 1844 exactly the same horrors, exactly 
the same transient canting outcries of " sensational litera- 
ture." But frightful increase of " deaths by starvation " in 
London during the last ten years proves beyond doubt the 
growing horror in which the working-people hold the slavery 
of the workhouse, that place of punishment for misery. 1 

(6.) The badly paid Strata of the British Industrial Class. 

During the Cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged 
by the Privy Council with an inquiry into the conditions of 
nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and 
Cheshire. His observations during many preceding years had 
led him to the conclusion that " to avert starvation diseases," 
the daily food of an average woman ought to contain at least 
3,900 grains of carbon with 180 grains of nitrogen ; the daily 
food of an average man, at least 4,300 grains of carbon with 
200 grains of nitrogen ; for women, about the same quantity of 
nutritive elements as are contained in 2 lbs of good wheaten 

1 A peculiar light is thrown on the advance made since the time of Adam Smith, 
by the fact that by him the word " workhouse " is still occasionally used as synony- 
mous with "manufactory;" e.g., the opening of his chapter on the division of 
labour ; " those employed in every different branch of the work can often be col- 
lected into the same workhouse." 



The General Lazu of Capitalist Accumula: 671 

I ; ' weekly .!t men 

and t 1^-ast 2^ pains 1 

of dj Bi calculati q was practically confirmed in a 

manner by its agreement with the mi uty 

riahment to which a fed down I Qsamp- 

: I 1 I ' 
.1 •■••kly. 

In tli vy ( '••iiin-il ( inquiry fa 

• • English 
I »r. Sit • • Pi . I 'i<-il, 

• nti'Mi- I 1 Smith. 1 1 . 
band over the agricultural la] 
silk-v. ten, k 

Iring-a I 

, with t ; the _, r -weav 

n-dwellera Ii !•• a rule in tin* inquiry 

1 eacfa categni ealthy families, and those 

vely iii tin- i 1 instances. 

As a genera] rasoli it was found in onlj 

mined • the average] trogen- 

■up] hilt* in it nearly reached, 

sathnated tandard of bare iut!i-i.n.y \>> . ^ 1 1 1 ! i . • i . • 1 1 1 t 1 avert 
»tar 1 : • • • sfeei — 

en and carbon. 

as regards the exani in- *1 familie lltural 

I ippeared a fifth \\<i< with leas 

than tl I iumciei laceou* i I more 

thai iird were a ith lei 

' in three counties I 
re, and umciai nitrogenot. 

wa* I srage loeal diet/* 1 Among . Itutal lalxrorera, 

fhose of Kn_\.ih'l. the weelt • r : ,f "f ths United Km^loin. 
b the womt fed. 1 I numfficiency of ■ 

i\ \n\» a in fly on the woman 

children, ' man n 



6/2 



Capitalist Production. 



are so ill fed that assuredly among them there must be many 
cases of severe and injurious privation." x (" Privation " of the 
capitalist all this ! i.e., " abstinence " from paying for the 
means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere vegeta- 
tion of his " hands.") 

The following table shows the conditions of nourishment 
of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling work- 
people, as compared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, 
and with the food- allowance of the cotton operatives during 
the time of their ereatest distress : 



both Sexes. 


Average Weekly 
Carbon. 


Average Weekly i 
Nitrogen. 


Five in-door occupations 

Unemployed Lancashire Operatives 

Minimum quantity to be allowed to 
the Lancashire Operatives, equal 
number of males and females. 


28,876 grains 
28,211 „ 

28,600 „ 


1,192 grains 
1,295 „ 

1,330 „ - 



One half, or ■££% of the industrial labour categories investi- 
gated, had absolutely no beer, 28^/ no milk. The weekly average 
of the liquid means of nourishment in the families varied from 
seven ounces in the needle- women to 24f- ounces in the stock- 
ing-makers. The majority of those who did not obtain milk 
were needle-women in London. The quantity of bread-stuffs 
consumed weekly varied from 7f lbs for the needle-women to 
ll^lbs for the shoemakers, and gave a total average of 9 9 lbs 
per adult weekly. Sugar (treacle, etc.) varied from 4 ounces 
weekly for the kid-glovers to 11 ounces for the stocking- 
makers ; and the total average per week for all categories was 
8 ounces per adult weekly. Total weekly average of butter 
(fat, etc.) 5 ounces per adult. The weekly average of 
meat (bacon, etc.) varied from 7J ounces for the silk-weavers, 
to 18J ounces for the kid-glovers; total average for the differ- 
ent categories 13*6 ounces. The weekly cost of food per adult, 
gave the following average figures ; silk- weavers 2s. 2^d., 

1 1. c. p. 13. 

2 1. c, Appendix p. 232. 



Tit C xl La rf Capitalist Accumulation. ( 
humeri 2 7 1., ki<l-- \ 

king v. I | i 1 llk-W • ;ivt-i 

fiel I th< y 1 

idle-women, silk I ki-1-. the:*; 

D in hi I ral Health B 

cases an- innum< in which 

►r ol di firmed bj oe « ho ii 

with poor law . or with the 

an 1 oul >. . . . Y t in thi> point 

<>f i ■ bere is, In my opim »n, «*i \ .-i y im; 

Ided It- "ii. • bat pi 

baa ;i ii ; 
ness of diet will when other )• 

it. L insuffici< Lief Ki i i 

would think 
1 carh mi m bich in: 
I be bou I will hare heen 

clothing and foal will 
icanti 

■ 
wll have been !•••• in which 

■.-. nr ii 
an 1 fm oil .-. ill ha 

Bets will h 

- 'i-tfiil 

: i-sriit additional bungei I 

lea*t drainage, least h« 

ply, an«l. it" in t..\\ n, IraM 

is almo .■»••■!, w Ik n i( im 

i while tl 

» 1 



674 Capitalist Production. 

idleness. In all cases it is the poverty of working popula- 
tions. Indeed, as regards the indoor opervatives, the work 
which obtains the scanty pittance of food, is for the most part 
excessively prolonged. Yet evidently it is only in a qualified 

sense that the work can be deemed self-supporting 

And on a very large scale the nominal self-support can be only 
a circuit, longer or shorter, to pauperism." 1 

The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the 
most industrious layers of the working class, and the extrava- 
gant consumption, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which 
capitalist accumulation is the basis, reveals itself only when the 
economic laws are known. It is otherwise with the " housing: 
of the poor." Every unprejudiced observer sees that the greater 
the centralisation of the means of production, the greater is 
the corresponding heaping together of the labourers, within 
a given space ; that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumula- 
tion, the more miserable are the dwellings of the working- 
people. " Improvements " of towns, accompanying the increase 
of wealth, by the demolition of badly built quarters, the erection 
of palaces for banks, warehouses, &c, the widening of streets 
for business traffic, for the carriages of luxury, and for the in- 
troduction of tramways, &c, drive away the poor into even 
worse and more crowded hiding places. On the other hand, 
every one knows that the dearness of dwellings is in inverse 
ratio to their excellence, and that the mines of misery are ex- 
ploited by house speculators with more profit or less cost than 
ever were the mines of Potosi. The antagonistic character of 
capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capitalistic rela- 
tions of property generally, 2 is here so evident, that even the 
official English reports on this subject teem with heterodox on- 
slaughts on "property and its rights." With the development 
of industry, with the accumulation of capital, with the growth 
and " improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that 

1 1. c. pp. 14, 15. 

2 " In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and shamefully 
sacrificed to the rights of property as in regard to the lodging of the labouring class. 
Every large town may be looked upon as a place of human sacrifice, a shrine where 
thousands pass yearly through the fire as offerings to the moloch of avarice." S. 
Laing, 1. c. p. 150. 



Tki C> neral Law of Capitalist 

men h-ar of i>«-s i hich d< I I 

1847 1 
less than 10 Ad t on n th»- 

Li\ erpool, ' 
■ n> in i through municipi 

Simon, in hi 

>.ii<l that t: lied in 

I B l'i ivy < '.iiiiii'il, in ! n inqu 

into the oond 

I ••> int. 

r Dr. Julian Huntei 

I in i ith 1803 and eighth 1 

Pul lie I leall T I h J laboui • I ball «nc 

a dwellings, I quote, ai | 
litui mai k i • I »■ Simon. 

al point he Baj 

mon humanit of 

[nil i • » i t [ » t , 

nlm< osaarily involve! inch negati n <>f 

ill delio i«h unclean < n <-f i.»<li- > ami bodilj 

mimaJ and - ledneai, 

U^tial than human T ■!»• lubj 'm-nces 

is a degradation irhmli m 

i • • on w 1 1 • in it . ■ Po i bildren * 

, it mi. n be a \ • in 

md all ■ 

\ . i in 

in ]•} 
cal ami in >r fil 
I. • 

until : II- • 

Uuntei 

I • 
ablu romiii ... • as seen i*1m'\ 

m In.!.;-: BStlll ol ' l«a'l h 

accom: 1 Atld i| 

looditi 

i ii . . . , ii | i 



676 Capitalist Production. 

was the case 20 years ago." 1 " It is not too much to say that 
life in parts of London and Newcastle is infernal." 2 

Further, the better-off part of the working class, together with 
the small shopkeepers and other elements of the lower middle 
class, falls in London more and more under the curse of these 
vile conditions of dwelling, in proportion as " improvements," 
and with them the demolition of old streets and houses, ad- 
vance, as factories and the afflux of human beings grow in the 
metropolis, and finally as house rents rise with the ground 
rents. " Rents have become so heavy that few labouring men 
can afford more than one room." 3 There is almost no house- 
property in London that is not overburdened with a number of 
middlemen. For the price of land in London is always very 
high in comparison with its yearly revenue, and therefore 
every buyer speculates on getting rid of it again at a jury 
price (the expropriation valuation fixed by jurymen), or on 
pocketing an extraordinary increase of value arising from the 
neighbourhood of some large establishment. As a consequence 
of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of " fag-ends of 
leases." " Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected 
to do as they do — get all they can from the tenants while they 
have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors." 4 

The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. In 
consequence of the making of railroads in the City, " the 
spectacle has lately been seen in the East of London of a 
number of families wandering about some Saturday night with 
their scanty worldly goods on their backs, without any resting 
place but the workhouse." 5 The workhouses are already over- 



1 1. c. p. 89. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hunter says : 
" People are not now alive to tell us how children were brought up before this age of 
dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a rash prophet who should tell 
us what future behaviour is to be expected from the present growth of children, who, 
under circumstances probably never before paralleled in this country, are now com- 
pleting their education for future practice, as " dangerous classes " by sitting up half 
the night with persons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and quarrelsome." 
(1. c. p. 56.) 

2 1. c. p. 62. 

3 Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fields, 1S65. 

4 Public Health, eighth report, 1865, p. 91. 

5 1. c. p. 88 



Thi General Law of Capitalist Accumulation* 677 

the " impr v. HMOl ACtioned 

luunen( »nlyjn8t begun. It" iven ai 

aolition '»!' bheir old li" 
jh, or at in «st they settle 

" I';.- y 1 1 . • .tin M I 

: 

1 I ■ 11 • •.• pari !», parting their tenem 

r >iu8, and crowdii ... I I an 

■ ]>'.<• « . . ipla«-.-<l w ill In, 

■ 

bai e ■ ••il . . . J I.. :i-l . . 

walked two miles to tl rork." 1 Strand, 1 

utrangern an impoainj 

Wealth -i L m Ion, • a> an ixainph 

:• «»l hum,. '.11. Jn one of ll 

I [ealth re< 

Tii 1 in. It \\ ill • 

and< lire, w b 

cafe liun( - 1 be 

minliahital'i'- li v«-*. «»n » w • i 

1 h 
1 1 'i g will of necesait 

r be * it i , called 

i|»l»l\in i their 

liavr 1 oapital i's, tlm 

\s l . i j 

th«iu - Admire tli 

as ra 
■trufU, v reo II mirni, ac- 

be oomf 
l 

« bild and fihatfrnli, 
"'it i ,.j «trc< o larga nombai 

war 

1 1 a ». m. 



6jS Capitalist Production. 

Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th 
century no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. 
Only five had more than 50,000. Now there are 28 towns 
with more than 50,000 inhabitants. " The result of this change 
is not only that the class of town people is enormously in- 
creased, but the old close-packed little towns are now centres, 
built round on every side, open nowhere to air, and being no 
longer agreeable to the rich are abandoned by them for the 
pleasanter outskirts. The successors of these rich are occupy- 
ing the larger houses at the rate of a family to each room [. . . 
and find accommodation for two or three lodgers . . .] and a 
population, for which the houses were not intended and quite 
unfit, has been created, whose surroundings are truly degrading 
to the adults and ruinous to the children." x The more rapidly 
capital accumulates in an industrial or commercial town, the 
more rapidly flows the stream of exploitable human material, 
the more miserable are the improvised dwellings of the 
labourers. 

Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district 
of growing productiveness, takes the next place after London 
in the housing inferno. Not less than 34,000 persons live there 
in single rooms. Because of their absolute danger to the com- 
munity, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed 
by the authorities in Newcastle and Gateshead. The building 
of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly. 
The town was, therefore, in 1865, more full than ever. Scarcely 
a room was to let. Dr. Embleton, of the Newcastle Fever 
Hospital, says : " There can be little doubt that the great cause 
of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the over- 
crowding of human beings, and the uncleanliness of their 
dwellings. The rooms, in which labourers in many cases live, 
are situated in confined and unwholesome yards or courts, and 
for space, light, air, and cleanliness, are models of insufficiency 
and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any civilised community ; 
in them men, women, and children lie at night huddled to- 
gether ; and as regards the men, the night-shift succeed the 
day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken series 

1 L c. pp. 55 and 56. 



The C vw of Capitalist Accumulation* ( 

• ▼ether, the b -<U having . rim.- t 

bouse badly supplied with i •• with 

}»rivi.-^; dirty, i] n vt-ritil;it«*«l, tod pestiferOU {•••! 

ich loil^inj- r;mir»-s t'r>mi B<L to Si, D of 

■ !i-T\ !!••. I >r 1 hint mtains ■ tampfc 

finest tril ir countryman, often mnk by external 

run ' int. # ;tli aim '•• dogll 

_ " * 

tion 

I ff the ebbing and Bowing ofi I -'. and I 
tate of 1 in imliistrial town mag I ■ 

bear, ble, < )r the k Lileehip of 

pulled the i 

T : ■ iwann of locusts, oome 

crowding in inasaea of ragge«l Iri^hnnn . ish 

lI labutmi v Th ty in • 

the bithert > respeetabh* lab ms> 

.••«! int.. a I wlin hanges a^ 

tkly as the ts in tl 30 I B 

the municipal philistine was ju^t 

•i iinpr-.v.-rii.-ii' I ^till in 

1751 uninhabited li«»u • 
u bich the mildly liberal Mi 
rit-^i n ith s«» iiiui'h grace. With 

the i 

. •• iurplua 

I f I r'htful rrllar 

i in the h Dr. VJ I from the t 



•■ 


1 i 


•-Mil 


• « 


1 


1 




u 




1 




u 


is 


1 








1 






!-> 






M 


i; 










1 








1 






ii«urg* MM**!. 


1 




..«il»*« 



680 Capitalist Production. 

an Insurance Company, were for the most part inhabited by 
well-paid labourers. They declared that they would willingly 
pay for better dwellings if they were to be had. Meanwhile, 
they become degraded, they fall ill, one and all, whilst the 
mildly liberal Forster, M.P., sheds tears over the blessings of 
free-trade, and the profits of the eminent men of Bradford who 
deal in worsted. In the Report of September, 18G5, Dr. Bell, 
one of the poor law doctors of Bradford, ascribes the frightful 
mortality of fever-patients in his district to the nature of their 
dwellings. " In one small cellar measuring 1500 cubic feet . . . 
there are ten persons. . . . Vincent Street, Green Aire 
Place, and the Leys include 223 houses having 1,450 inhabi- 
tants, 435 beds, and 36 privies The beds — and in 

that term I include any roll of dirty old rags, or an armful of 
shavings — have an average of 3*3 person to each, many have 5 
and 6 persons to each, and some people, I am told, are abso- 
solutely without beds ; they sleep in their ordinary clothes, on 
the bare boards — young men and women, married and un- 
married, all together. I need scarcely add that many of these 
dwellings are dark, damp, dirty, stinking holes, utterly unfit 
for human habitations ; they are the centres from which disease 
and death are distributed amongst those in better circum- 
stances, who have allowed them thus to fester in our midst." 1 
Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of 



Eifle Court Marygate, No. 


11 


1 


room 


11 persons 


Marshall Street, No. 28 




1 


»> 


10 „ 


Marshall Street, No. 49 




3 


>> 


3 families 


George Street, No. 128 




1 


>» 


18 persons 


George Street, No. 130 




1 


5» 


16 „ 


Edward Street, No. 4 




1 


5» 


17 „ 


George Street, No. 49 




1 


»> 


2 families 


York Street, No. 34 




1 


>> 


2 „ 


Salt Pie Street (bottom) 


Cellars. 


2 


J> 


26 persons 


Regent Square 




1 cellar 


8 persons 


Acre Street 




1 


if 


7 „ 


33 Roberts Court 




1 


>> 


7 „ 


Back Pratt Street, used as a ~j 








brazier's shop 


/ 


1 


5) 


7 ,, 


27 Ebenezer Street 




1 


H 


6 „(nom above 18). 



1. c. p. iii. 
U c. p. 114. 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, i 

Iwellin Bi i I >1. where : : blankest ] 

domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town 

c. Tlf 1 Worn • I /' . - ' ■ n. 

We torn f peopl iltural, 

• purl industrial. 

t infanl it, ace 

thia point, now to thai When the} 
man mp, " I labour ii used I 

tion of build fining, brick-making, Lim< 

lllllill (if prstilrnri 

the plaeee in whose neighbourhood it pil camp, 

■mail-pox, t\ ; ■ 1 In undei I 

that in the 

himself generally ; i his army with \ 

the like, thus improvising villages with 

ie control of tin- local board 

; 

fold fa uli ion — an and ai tan 

I •_'. • i 3 inhal il 

f be, bai 
kly." I cample w ill nthVr In S I >r 

1 u of tin* N 1> 

< 'omm • the pariah i •' mq( the f >l 

miii 

. Ip.*ard of in tli pai i^l» until about I 
Shortly I 

I ■ unoed hei i I, in 

a«l«l the pi incipal work n the imm 

here w 

large numb 

age arri>iniii< 
:ii all. I rn DOiH in StTSral place* 

tl ofitraetor, Mi J 

il OCCU] I 

■IS. U(., p. 1C\ 



682 Capitalist Production. 

drainage, and, besides, were necessarily overcrowded, because 
each occupant had to accommodate lodgers, whatever the num- 
ber in his own family might be, although there were only two 
rooms to each tenement. The consequences were, according to 
the medical report we received, that in the night-time these 
poor people were compelled to endure all the horror of suffoca- 
tion to avoid the pestiferous smells arising from the filthy, 
stagnant water, and the privies close under their windows. 
Complaints were at length made to the Nuisances Removal 
Committee by a medical gentleman who had occasion to visit 
these huts, and he spoke of their condition as dwellings in the 
most severe terms, and he expressed his fears that some very 
serious consequences might ensue, unless some sanitary measures 
were adopted. About a year ago, Mr. Jay promised to appro- 
priate a hut, to which persons in his employ, who were suffering 
from contagious diseases, might at once be removed. He repeated 
that promise on the 23rd July last, but although since the date 
of the last promise there have been several cases of small-pox 
in his huts, and two deaths from the same disease, yet he has 
taken no steps whatever to carry out his promise. On the 9th 
September instant, Mr. Kelson, surgeon, reported to me further 
cases of small-pox in the same huts, and he described their 
condition as most disgraceful. I should add, for your (the 
Home Secretary's) information that an isolated house, called 
the Pest-house, which is set apart for parishioners who might 
be suffering from infectious diseases, has been continually 
occupied by such patients for many months past, and is also 
now occupied ; that in one family five children died from small- 
pox and fever ; that from the 1st April to the 1st September 
this year, a period of five months, there have been no fewer 
than ten deaths from small-pox in the parish, four of them being 
in the huts already referred to ; that it is impossible to ascer- 
tain the exact number of persons who have suffered from that 
disease, although they are known to be many, from the fact of 
the families keeping it as private as possible." 1 

1 1. c, p. 18, Note. — The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith Union 
reported to the Registrar-General as follows: — "At Doveholes, a number of small 
excavations have been made into a large hillock of lime ashes (the refuse of lime- 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. < 

orari in ooa] in 1 otter mines belong 
of the British proletariat Tbc price al 
their wages was shown on an eai '._,'».-. l li re J van 

• a bui t til-- c '.'i litions of \ 

As a hi- 

iiit, builds a ii f 

••- and i'ual for h'rin« r "fur nothing"- 
.it >,i their wages, paid in kind. Those w\ 
in thi annum 

minin t with rapidity a large populal 

up of the miners thei -, and the artisans, 

kee| CToap themselves around them. ind- 

illy nvIi 

master I run 'ij», within tin* smallest 

.nth of the pit, j 

i her hU hand* and their 1 

w mines are opened in ti libourhood 

again h« -t woi In i 

«»t' t • . • m-!ii 

the ca| :n all • 

i i ia obtaine 1 b) 

lbs pitm< n ai i - oonnecU'd u it li tip- colli( 

th umber land Hunt i 

i th.' d .vlihli any 

■>bes 

• except. 1 ne badness ia 

in il . nutnl .alines* 

nuiulnr ••!' I 
thru absence « 

ch at* u«*l *• lv :!ing«, and ooeupir • -. »n<| otbaca —r 

•KMirvciioct of * mflvej of owMti mtlum ibroujk 

«mrboo.l Thar. . *r» .mall • » I ka%. ft- 

m. «o.l nut i hoi. j. 

tfeioufb U*« %u\», an<l u« In oofeaaqiiaax* 

ka* h.ct, ra^w.g f., r *„ '.h*(an»c». baaa 

oial) 

lk» U^rm.nr<aJ 



684 Capitalist Production. 

tion into flats, . . . the lessee acts as if the whole colony were 
encamped, not resident." 1 

" In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, " I 
visited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham Union. 
. . . With very few exceptions, the general statement that no 
means are taken to secure the health of the inhabitants would 
be true of all of them. . . . All colliers are bound [' bound,' 
an expression which, like bondage, dates from the age of serf- 
dom] to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months 

If the colliers express discontent, or in any way annoy the 
' viewer,' a mark or memorandum is made against their names, 
and, at the annual ' binding,' such men are turned off. .... 
It appears to me that no part of the ' truck system ' could be 
worse than what obtains in these densely-populated districts. 
The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house sur- 
rounded with pestiferous influences ; he cannot help himself, 
and it appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him 
except his proprietor (he is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), 
and his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the 
result is tolerably certain. The collier is also often supplied with 
water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he 
has to pa} 7 tor, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his 
wages." 2 

In conflict with " public opinion," or even with the Officers of 
Health, capital makes no difficulty about "justifying" the con- 
ditions partly dangerous, partly degrading, to which it confines 
the working and domestic life of the labourer, on the ground 
that they are necessary for profit. It is the same thing when 
capital tt abstains" from protective measures against dangerous 
machinery in the factory, from appliances for ventilation and 
for safety in mines, &c. It is the same here with the housing 
of the miners. Dr. Simon, medical officer of the Privy Council, 
in his official Report says: " In apology for the wretched house- 
hold accommodation ... it is alleged that mines are commonly 
worked on lease ; that the duration of the lessee's interest 
(which in collieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that 
he should deem it worth his while to create good accommoda- 

1 1. c, pp. 180, 182. 2 1. c, pp. 515, 517. 



7/ ? Capitalist A 

f >r his Lai >le and 

(be work atti 

in the i I muionlj I 

m him • ound 

tlic privil : 

the ' • .'-'it, 

and that prohibitory pi 

lio mi 'ht «!••- build. It w< »ul 1 be I 

ipon any di 
the 1 Noi ii D6( 

where it would be that, if 

I, tl..- «-..^t . . . wouM . ventually full — \\ 
on 1. ' jMil.l; I it in | 

imeful nelied f n in tb 

f Dr. H D 

I ndlonlslii] 

I ■ landl >rd in hi 
mine-owner iii\ it« •> an in«li 

and then iii hi m possible 

li-- i 

I lessee [Ui 
i 
of the barj 

him. tiiat In 

valur i 

inducem 

: ' 

■ 
ill be remeiii 
groat crises with w bi< h th< indu 



686 Capitalist Production. 

The next termination of the cycle was due in 18G6. Already 
discounted in the regular factory districts by the cotton famine, 
which threw much capital from its wonted sphere into the 
great centres of the money-market, the crisis assumed, at this 
time, an especially financial character. Its outbreak in 1866 
was signalised by the failure of a gigantic London Bank, im- 
mediately followed by the collapse of countless swindling com- 
panies. One of the great London branches of industry involved 
in the catastrophe was iron shipbuilding. The magnates of 
this trade had not only over-produced beyond all measure 
during the overtrading time, but they had, besides, engaged 
in enormous contracts on the speculation that credit would 
be forthcoming to an equivalent extent. Now, a terrible 
reaction set in, that even at this hour (the end of March, 1867) 
continues in this and other London industries. 1 To show the 
condition of the labourers, I quote the following from the 
circumstantial report of a correspondent of the " Morning Star," 
who, at the end of 1866, and beginning of 1867, visited the 
chief centres of distress : " In the East End districts of Poplar, 
Millwall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse and Canning Town, 
at least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of 
utter destitution, and 3000 skilled mechanics were breaking 
stones in the workhouse yard (after distress of over half a year's 
duration) I had great difficulty in reaching the work- 
house door, for a hungry crowd besieged it They were 

waiting for their tickets, but the time had not yet arrived for 
the distribution. The yard was a great square place with an 
open shed running all round it, and several large heaps of snow 

1 " Wholesale starvation of the London Poor. . . . Within the last few days the 
walls of London have been placarded with large posters, bearing the following re- 
markable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The fat oxen from their 
palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxurious abode, while the starving 
men are left to rot and die in their wretched dens.' The placards bearing these 
ominous words are put up at certain intervals. No sooner has one set been defaced 
or covered over, than a fresh set is placarded in the former, or some equally public 

place This . . . reminds one of the secret revolutionary associations which 

prepared the French people for the events of 1789 At this moment, while 

English workmen with their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there 
are millions of English gold— the produce of English labour— being invested in 
Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign enterprises." — "Reynolds' Newspaper," 
January 20th, 1807. 



TIu G Law of Capitalist Accu 

in the middle In the middle, a. 
ii icker-fei 
the men but "i» tl -t my viaH the j>ena 

'1 iij» that i Mt in them. M- : 

, in th< paviii. 

\. i men bad a big pavinj i- a seat, and 

shipped • * he im. 

until be had broken up, and think I five bush I 

e bit d 
fend an al L In 

den li 
. foul I it h men 1 h iud<lletl together 

ihouldei ' i nith of ■ • 

reath, Tb picking oakum Liaputii 

wbil which could irork the loi eat on a 

«>f f irai the point of honour. 

one workhouse . . . a 
bundled m . . it appear. -.1, •>. 

. ' ;u nin^ t l t . .-^ paiil t 

r rium uld l»«- more tl >ubled 

Uioae who, bavin l: ••xhnu>t<(| all their avin^a, still refuse to 

, l^ecauae th 
Leaving 1 1 * - - workhou I t<*»k a walk t 

Bios' i iii 

aa a nn 
M 

1 l»een He I employment 1 

in wai n"t ban i^ a fin in it 

Led feet «>f 1 1 

the 
Ti,. i m a Iced in tl,.- • i Hu- 

rl I noU •" ,'iit«' h i im 

wit: anchc ontietcd of n 

bread and dripj ■ cup oi milkleai tea 



688 Capitalist Production. 

The next door at which we knocked was opened by a middle-, 
aged woman, who, without saying a word, led us into a little 
hack parlour, in which sat all her family, silent and fixedly 
staring at a rapidly dying fire. Such desolation, such hope- 
lessness was about these people and their little room, as I should 
not care to witness again. ' Nothing have they done, sir,' said 
the woman, pointing to her boys, ' for six and twenty weeks ; 
and all our money gone — all the twenty pounds that me and 
father saved when times were better, thinking it would yield a 
little to keep us when we got past work. Look at it,' she said, 
almost fiercely, bringing out a bank book with all its well-kept 
entries of money paid in, and money taken out, so that we 
could see how the little fortune had begun with the first five 
shilling deposit, and had grown by little and little to be twenty 
pounds, and how it had melted down again till the sum in hand 
got from pounds to shillings, and the last entry made the book 
as worthless as a blank sheet. This family received relief from 
the workhouse, and it furnished them with just one scanty 

meal per day Our next visit was to an iron labourer's 

wife, whose husband had worked in the yards. We found her 
ill from want of food, lying on a mattress in her clothes, and 
just covered with a strip of carpet, for all the bedding had been 
pawned. Two wretched children were tending her, themselves 
looking as much in need of nursing as their mother. Nineteen 
weeks of enforced idleness had brought them to this pass, and 
while the mother told the history of that bitter past, she 
moaned as if all her faith in a future that should atone for it 

were dead On getting outside a young fellow came 

running after us, and asked us to step inside his house and see 
if anything could be done for him. A young wife, two pretty 
children, a cluster of pawn-tickets, and a bare room were all 
he had to show." 

On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract 
from a Tory newspaper. It must not be forgotten that the 
East-end of London, which is here dealt with, is not only the 
seat of the iron shipbuilding mentioned above, but also of 
a so-called " home-industry" always underpaid. "A frightful 
spectacle was to be seen yesterday in one part of the metro- 



77 d La w of C \ ip it a I: t Ai r u »i ulat io n. 689 

polia Althou onempl »ye«J th Is of tl<- 

« 1 i • 1 not parade with their black flagi "< mcum human 

rit wh unpoain Let 

They are dying of hunger. That ample 

and tei ribl -t them. . . . In our , 

■ 
— n- the 1 dom accnmnlatioc of wealth 

wor! w\ with thi^ an 10 li'lpleas, 

Tlh>f 1 1. lung in upon 

the other quai b 1 ahi 

in our ears, t b 1 1 1 

able dwell it it i~ impo ible I I m t-. ti 1 

1 • ■_ 'I'll. - lm-al 

blal fhargee to the \ t' pauperiam.' 1 — 

\|.nl. L8( 

A , it 1 t ; i ,11 amoc * l In jliah capita 

1 u 111 I .iiriT I Fi-.-t-il. iin ■ f 

• t Iiiult. ' 1 1 • • -« I < »iii <•: il," i> t i 
y the di I ] I 1 

I or i •'. 1 on the " happim 

. . - n ai more thoroughly inil iafc d in 

It] : II the Ut«* M. I>il< 

1 tifltitut 

i-.ii i»t I . I 

hi- 1 'i 1 1 ii 1 lies den «l.i>-- - uiivi i« 

I !• re we till* 1 . 
irmnl I' »v y. 

•lit- am : ' - nil \ ! 

1 those 
• . tailor, ai 1 be 

. in« »tl. 

employed the wl • at through It 

1 k 
I 

IIH4-H dUO I 



690 Capitalist Production. 

of tobacco," and on Sundays " go to the cabaret" for which a 
whole 86 centimes a week are reckoned. " From a general 
compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different trades, 
it follows that the highest average of daily wage is 1 franc 
56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, 
and 55 centimes for girls. Calculated at this rate, the re- 
sources of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1068 
francs a-year ... In the family . . . taken as typical we 
have calculated all possible resources. But in ascribing wages 
to the mother of the family we raise the question of the direc- 
tion of the household. How will its internal economy be cared 
for ? Who will look after the young children ? Who will get 
ready the meals, do the washing and mending ? This is the 
dilemma incessantly presented to the labourers.' ' 
According to this the budget of the family is : 

The father 300 working days at fr. 156 
„ mother „ „ „ „ 89 

» ooy ,, „ „ „ 00 . . . 

Total fr. 1,068 

The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit 
upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of ; 



fr. 


468 


» 


267 


» 


168 


a 


165 



The man of war's man fr. 1828 


... Deficit fr. 760 


„ soldier „ 1473 


„ „ 40o 


„ prisoner ,,1112 


44 



" We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not 
say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the 
prisoner. The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in 
the different prisons during the period 1847-1849), has been 
63 centimes for all prisons. This figure, compared with that 
of the daily maintenance of the labourer, shows a difference 
of 13 centimes. It must be remarked further, that if in the 
prisons it is necessary to set down in the account the expenses 
of administration and surveillance, on the other hand, the pris- 
oners have not to nay for their lodging ; that the purchases 



77 ' f Capitalist Accumulation. 691 

I t included in t: 

maintenance, ami that tin 1 in 

: ili large Dumber • >! persona thai make op the 
eBtahli^lm.- ad ofc 1 r baying wholesale, the 

1 ot li'i t liin. into their tmption . 

i I w c< une.s it, h I naml 

:t majority, of 1 live in a mon* •■••■• i^- •u»"n-»tl v. 

. by a lopt : - . the f 11 hich only the 

urer ki I D 

'ij Itvss meat, or even D 
at all. and the same with hotter mdimend ; I mt- 

- \s ith «»ni- ..r tw > wIi.t.' • Daily Ifl 

rlfl deep side \ 

• be mom pallet ; bj lothing, m:, 
ncy I up the Sunday d f, in il 

• h- in •• I\ • •- t'i tin- iiin>t painful privatii 

Die lini : t, the I- a in tli-' |>! i 

■ 1 '>rk, ilh !i-r-;i - ami 

neti his rumpl. t.- ruin; <l«hts aocumu] Kails, 

tin- moat inoessary cloth furnituif an- |»awn«'«l. ami 

mily asks to be enrolled on the nst of paupers/ 
Du 1 1 1 I I •.■■.'.•■ . I ' 

capi* tange in the j 

tip- moat essential mean ge in the number 

af deal] 'uea I , I > 

pen Vooruit i ' ' ' n ;i " Bal- 

slum are '• milies, of whom, according t<> tin* <>ti 

are weal tl . tsfS=46O,0OO 

per*< : 1 tniliei of tie- lower innMlo-cla* \nw 

villages, the great) m constantly nnkii 

the] ! ' *>IM. Final!. <KX) w 

clasH faiuilii-^ rsons, of whoa tin 

■ I -pines* depicted by D < m t 

rnilii'H, ..-. are on the pe . 

/ 

Nnwl ! 

n in 



692 Capitalist Production. 

the progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding; 
and the retrogression of the English agricultural labourer. 
Before I turn to his present situation, a rapid retrospect- 
Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 
18th century, although the revolution in landed property, from 
which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has 
a much earlier date. 

If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful ob- 
server, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural 
labourer of 1771, the latter plays a very pitiable part compared 
with his predecessor of the end of the 14th century, " when the 
labourer . . . could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth," * not 
to speak of the loth century, " the golden age of the English 
labourer in town and country." We need not, however, go 
back so far. In a very instructive work of the year 1777 
we read : u The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level 
with him [the gentleman]; while the poor labourer is depressed 
almost to the earth. His unfortunate situation will fully ap- 
pear, by taking a comparative view of it, only forty years ago ; 
and at present. . . . Landlord and tenant . . . have both 
gone hand in hand in keeping the labourer down." 2 It is then 
proved in detail that the real agricultural wages between 1737 
and 1777 fell nearly \ or 25 per cent. " Modern policy," sa} T s 
Dr. Richard Price also, "is, indeed, more favourable to the 
higher classes of people ; and the consequences may in time 
prove that the whole kingdom will consist of only gentry anc 
beggars, or of grandees and slaves." 3 

1 James E. Thorold Rogers. (Prof, of Polit. Econ. in the University of Oxford.) 
A History of Agriculture and Prices in England. Oxford, 1866, v. I., p. 690. This 
work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains in the two volumes that have 
so far appeared, only the period from 1259 to 1400. The second volume contains 
simply statistics. It is the first authentic "History of Prices " of the time that we 
possess. 

2 Reasons for the late increase of the Poor -Rates, or a comparative view of the 
price of labour and provisions. Lond. , 1777, pp. 5, 11. 

3 Dr. Richard Price : Observations on Reversionary Payments, 6th Ed. By W. 
Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. II., pp. 15>, 159. Price remarks on p. 159: "The nominal 
price of day-labour is at present no more than about four times, or, at most, five times 
higher than it was in the year 1514. But the price of corn is seven times, and of 
flesh-meat and raiment about fifteen times higher. So far, therefore, has the pi ice 
of labour been even from advancing in proportion to the increase in the expenses of 



The ( j d Law of Capita' t . ! ./ tlation. 693 

: Of th( 

1770 1 I 7 - with regard 
wl'II his Be , i> an ideal rn 

i i i 

in pint - -.t wl I 77" I 1 I 77 I ' '' int 

7 7 'i. 1 

Ajiti- 
.1 »l.in war, daring which landed propriet nu- 

merchants, bank *, am. 

linarilv, DM 
iii' 1 : wages i'"~'- in 001 

•ik-n<»t.- depi partly • :>•• in tl. 

I this 

in a iplfl way, withoi 

Poor L w and ition v. 

in 17 : I ! • It will I Mil- 1. 1 l».»\v I 

carried ..ut in tl.. o.nnt iy <i in tl 

initial u tin- 1. 

mmii required li»r th-- -imj.l.- . 
• ••■II tl 
111 iL- i • ••...!, 1 

minimum ; eeoon<l. the degree 

III v. • U .1^. 

1 ami j _'n ••• in u hicli 

1 one comr 

iiit .. In v - 

tge weekly wage was 7 

H In hi! amine oountj 

• 

income, £36 2a ; 
In 1 . 
I- ' .-, in hll, 

1 I<m not apfiwu Iftftl It bmn aow half Um proportion to tham <\\<**mm 

c.olury ef YActi. I. a. 



694 Capitalist Production. 

evident that, under these circumstances, the meagre comforts 
that Eden still found in the cottage of the agricultural labourer, 
had vanished by 1814. 1 Of all the animals kept by the 
farmer, the labourer, the instrumentum vocale, was, thenceforth, 
the most oppressed, the worst nourished, the most brutally 
treated. 

The same state of things went on quietly until " the Swing 
riots, in 1830, revealed to us [i.e., the ruling classes] by the 
light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous 
discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface of 
agricultural as of manufacturing England." 2 At this time, 
Sadler, in the House of Commons, christened the agricultural 
labourers " white slaves," and a Bishop echoed the epithet in 
the Upper House. The most notable political economist of that 
period — E. G. Wakefield — says : " The peasant of the South 
of England ... is not a freeman, nor is he a slave ; he is a 
pauper." 3 

The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws threw new 
light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. On the 
one hand, it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to 
prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual producers 
of the corn. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie 
foamed with sullen rage at the denunciations of the factory 
system by the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy 
with the woes of the factory operatives, of those utterly 
corrupt, heartless, and genteel loafers, and at their " diplomatic 
zeal " for factory legislation. It is an old English proverb 
that " when thieves fall out, honest men come by their 
own," and, in fact, the noisy, passionate quarrel between the 
two fractions of the ruling class about the question, which of 
the two exploited the labourers the more shamefully, was on 
each hand the midwife of the truth. Earl Shaftesbury, then 
Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief in the aristocratic, phil- 
anthropic, anti -factory campaign. He was, therefore, in 1845, a 
favourite subject in the revelations of the "Morning Chronicle" 
on the condition of the agricultural labourers. This journal, 

1 id., p. 213. 2 S. Laing. 1. c, p. 62. 

3 England and America. Lond., 1833. Vol. I., p. 47 



The C / ' ' apitali.t . Xuumulotion 

then the m I important Liberal organ 

the agricultural districts, irho did 

thou ilt-criptiona and )»ut 

publi-h«<l tin.- n;u th of the labouring (ami] mined 

and of their landlordi Thefollowii 

in tliree vilht^t-. in I IiIh.iii. ford, Wiml 

I' <.!•• 'I 'hi vill;iL" L lit- j)i . iif Mr < 

and of th.- Earl oi Shaftesbury, it trill be just 

like Bankee, thu "low choroh i 1 1 * i -> bead ol 

I of th< i wages of the 

I be pn ■ — 

>T VILLA- 



(a) Children. 




a 


? 


Fan 


CO Weekly 


— z* 


kly 


1 


1 






a. 




d. 


■ 1. 


1 


B 




— 


8 


1 ., 


1. ,, 


1 || 


1 


» 


| | 


— 


8 


i 






1 


4 




— 


| 


1 1 




1 1 


1 


I 




1 • ■ 




1 


1 1 


' 


1 3 


r, 




1 


7 


1 1 


1 1 


1 1* 






.. 


I 


• 


a 






• 


. .1 
| | 




1 


h 










1 


» 


o 


1 


10 


• 




— 




' - 


5 a) 




t 


1 


«• 




— 




1 | 


ft ft* 




1 


1 










I • 


ft ft* 


i i 



696 



Capitalist Production. 

THIRD VILLAGE. 



2 


O d 




>>- 


3 °-2 ^ 


3 . 


g) Total 

ekly wago 
;er deduc- 
n of Rent. 


1 


2 

6 


Numb 
ember 
Famil 


^ s 

- — " c3 


Z— "^3 


) Wee 
icome 
e who 
Famil, 


£> S3 


) Wee 
come 
head. 


3. 


S- 1 ^ 


^ 




V 1— 1 rS 


s^ 




• — -HH 






s. d. 




s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


* 


6 


7 


— 


7 


1 


6 


1 

1 


3 


5 


7 


1/-, 2/-, 


11 6 


10 


10 8 

1 


2 1| 





2 


5 


1/-, 2 6, 


5 


1 


1 •• 


2 x 



The repeal of the Corn Laws gave a marvellous impulse to 
English agriculture. 2 Drainage on the most extensive scale, 
new methods of stall-feeding, and of the artificial cultivation 
of green crops, introduction of mechanical manuring apparatus* 
new treatment of clay soils, increased use of mineral manures, 
employment of the steam-engine, and of all kinds of new 
machinery, more intensive cultivation generally, characterised 
this epoch. Mr. Pusey, Chairman of the Royal Agricultural 
Society, declares that the (relative) expenses of farming have 
been reduced nearly one-half by the introduction of new 
machinery. On the other hand, the actual return of the soil 
rose rapidly. Greater outlay of capital per acre, and, as a con- 
sequence, more rapid concentration of farms, were essential 
conditions of the new method. 3 At the same time, the area 
under cultivation increased, from 1846 to 1856, by 464,119 
acres, without reckoning the great area in the Eastern Counties 

1 London Economist, March 29th, 1845, p. 290. 

2 The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course per Parliament, 
funds from the State Treasury, at a very low rate of interest, which the farmers have 
to make good at a much higher rate. 

3 The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in the census cate- 
gory : "Farmer's son, grandson, brother, nephew, daughter, grand-daughter, sister, 
niece " ; in a word, the member's of his own family, employed by the farmer. This 
category numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons ; in 1861, only 176,151. From 1851 to 
1871, the farms under 20 acres fell by more than 900 in number ; those between 50 
and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 6,370 ; the same thing occurred with all other farms 
under 100 acres. On the other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of 
large farms increased ; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more 
than 500 acres from 2,755 to 3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 492 to 
582. 



The General La f( \list A t. 697 

: from rabl I 

Jt I. - 'ii • 

in agri 

and of all ages ai fell from 1.: 

217 in l-' 1 ; U the Engli h 1: 

Tin- inn, 
and fann-lah l v "l. 1 kin 1 

• » tin- ii • iral pi 

wln-n 

• the agricultural population vrenl hand in hand with 
area m ■>. w ith more ii. - 

unheard 
with t: !. and d to 

s..il 1 in 

l!l(l- 

of tl 

• ■* iff. unbi 
I 

■ ■ 

! * 

I 

-I in the 1. 1 ith and in t 

unpen 

,.'.••1 ! 

peasant haa again •• a aei 

clothed J Dr. J . in 1 

mak Iwellin 

Mill tl. 

ran live 



I'.. • r. 1 



6o8 Capitalist Production. 

to be derived from him. He is a zero in farming calculations. * 
. . * . The means [of subsistence] being always supposed 
to be a fixed quantity. 2 As to any further reduction of his 
income, he may say. nihil habeo nihil euro. He has no fears 
for the future, because he has now only the spare supply 
necessa^ to keep him. He has reached the zero from which 
are dated the calculations of the farmer. Come what will, he 
has no share either in prosperity or adversity." 3 

In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the con- 
ditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals condemned 
to transportation and penal servitude. The results are re- 
corded in two voluminous blue books. Among other things it 
is said : " From an elaborate comparison between the diet of 
convicts in the convict prisons in England, and that of paupers 
in workhouses and of free labourers in the same country . . . 
it certainly appears that the former are much better fed than 
either of the two other classes," 4 whilst " the amount of labour 
required from an ordinary convict under penal servitude is 
about one half of what would be done by an ordinary day 
labourer." 5 A few characteristic depositions of witnesses : John 
Smith, governor of the Edinburgh prison, deposes : No. 5056. 
" The diet of the English prisons [is] superior to that of ordinary 
labourers in England." No. 50. " It is the fact . . . that 
the ordinary agricultural labourers in Scotland very seldom 
get any meat at all." Answer No. 3047. " Is there anything 
that you are aware of to account for the necessit}^ of feeding 
them very much better than ordinary labourers ? — Certainly 
not." No. 3048. "Do you think that further experiments 
ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a dietary 
might not be hit upon for prisoners employed on public works 
nearly approaching to the dietary of free labourers ? " 6 . . . 

1 Public Health. Seventh Report, 1864, p. 242. It is therefore nothing unusual 
either for the landlord to raise a labourer's rent as soon as he hears that he is 
earning a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the labourer, " because 
his wife has found a trade," 1. c. 

2 1. c. p. 135. 3 i. c. p . 134. 

4 Report of the Commissioners .... relating to transportation and penal 
servitude, Lond. 18G3, pp. 42. 50. 

5 1. c. p. 77. Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice. 

6 1. c. Vol. II. Minutes of Evidence. 



Tk teral Law of Capitalist . h \ umu 

■j [e f I nrer] might ' I work hard, 

lu't\ nd wli. n in prison I ork 

A therefore \\ 

lip ; a^aill thai I ! I : ■ 

the first volume of rt I hai 

annexed oomparatn e gummai 

wi.i.ki.^ KUQ\ NT OF NU1 IllMI N I. 







gcli" ■•» lit 


Mn 


feL 




















■ 


• 




■1 










111 
















1 


B 










17 . 




Ml 


UB-W 1 



rr-ult • inquiry hy the Died 

of l lowest bd lnnnoe, in ilrnn I kn 

II.. I lllfflllxT tl 

the agricultural labo allies is below tl 

in'ir ;u\ t-< airesl itarvation diseases." I 

tin i all the i i 

aii-1 II ' 

doui labourer 1. I 

Sim" 

in iMo him to pel I 

memberi 
- in m u rj .*ill tic meal i 

Th« . 

■ 
D ill most every r lieient, 



yoo Capitalist Production. 

in nitrogen." 1 The male and female servants living with the 
farmers themselves are sufficiently nourished. Their number 
fell from 288,277 in 1851, to 204962 in 1861. " The labour of 
women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, " whatever may be its 
disadvantages, .... is under present circumstances of 
great advantage to the family, since it adds that amount of in- 
come which . . . provides shoes and clothing and pays 
the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed." 2 One 
of the most remarkable results of the inquiry was that the 
agricultural labourer of EDgland, as compared with other parts 
of the United Kingdom, " is considerably the worst fed," as the 
appended table shows : 

Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an 
average agricultural adult. 

Carbon, grains. Nitrogen, grains. 

1-594- 
2-031 
2-348 
2-434. 3 



1 Public Health, Sixth Report, 1863, pp. 238, 249, 261, 262. 

2 1. c. p. 262. 

3 1. c. p. 17. The English agricultural labourer receives only | as much milk, and 
h as much bread as the Irish. Arthur Young in his " Tour through Ireland," at the 
beginning of this century, already noticed the better nourishment of the latter. 
The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer is incomparably more humane 
than the rich English. As regards Wales, that which is said in the text holds only 
for the south-west. All the doctors there agree that the increase of the deathrate 
through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., increases in intensity with the deterioration of 
the physical condition of the population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. 
" His (the farm labourer's) keep is reckoned at about five pence a day, but in many 
districts it was said to be of much less cost to the farmer " [himself very poor], . . . 
"A morsel of the salt meat or bacon, . . . salted and dried to the texture of ma- 
hogany, and hardly worth the difficult process of assimilation is used to 

flavour a large quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this is 
the labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh 
and damp climate, in " the abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in favour 
of the cheap and so-called cotton goods," and of stronger drinks for so-called tea. 
" The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and rain, gains his cottage to 
sit by a fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal kneaded together, from which 
volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids are poured forth. His walls are of mud 
and stones, his floor the bare earth which was there before the hut was built, his 
roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. Every crevice is stopped to maintain 
warmth, and in an atmosphere of diabolic odour, with a mud floor, with his only 



England 


46673 


Wales 


48354 


Scotland 


48-980 


Ireland 


43366 



Th » oj Capita xmulatx i 701 

the iri md mi 

1," say 1 : in bin 

official Bealtl 

D Bunt port I oy. 

mally, foi DO ATI |»a-t, 1 1 1 ♦ * it I the I (TV ID 

1 has 1 

difficult find, and, wl. 

■ 

I .illy within the hi 

Lj.i-1 in i <ir 

.v in tl. 
able I ivIhuii hi> lal 

pitiful in 

pec* Whether ha ihall find 

:i on 1 li be contribute! to till, whether the 

h he geti shall be human or iwineish, n 
hall I. space of gar<i« n tl 

tin- j'l'-HSUre of Ins : ill tin 

-Iran. 

Mi, ■ ■ • . r n i .»: . « * ' • MV9BMBM |>.»r ' « ■■! t !.• ftjgbt in «i< h < .»liin« kill HMriM !*<»>» 

■ 

Uuk) to drill a • ffect a 1 It waa at 

taote<l \>y 

flamoct, ami many more, the oadarfwl poaouit «m nigh: ■ 

re w** i Irnor. 

a striking war the mnu> iUU uf tlun^. Thera la baaid« ^-uo morw b«>r 

•till I oo tho climatic <«• 

ifrjsag sootl * • • •• . ■ ■■* « • -*• r ?.:.■ »bol« ooontry for 8 or 9 son tin in th< >• w 

wr»U»rn alopaa 
■ 
blovi Th« « .<t **,»«•• generally orooc I 

• rmvui" I oooo bat lha asn 

psJtwti l ><*tag J*.. 

!i vrti. .,..(. u.- |s the bfssafli ,; W i .... i if tj.. Blakaj 
Tba population oaa therefore banly ««• • 

■ »"1 



V 




lllll 






Hajaj 












702 Capitalist Production. 

willingness and ability to pay reasonable rent for the decent 
accommodation he requires, but depends on the use which 
others may see fit to make of their c right to do as they will 
with their own.' However large may be a farm, there is no 
law that a certain proportion of labourers' dwellings (much less 
of decent dwellings) shall be upon it ; nor does any law reserve 
for the labourer ever so little right in that soil to which his 
industry is as needful as sun and rain .... An extraneous 
element weighs the balance heavily against him .... the in- 
fluence of the Poor Law in its provisions concerning settle- 
ment and chargeability. 1 Under this influence, each parish 
has a pecuniary interest in reducing to a minimum the number 
of its resident labourers : — for, unhappily, agricultural labour 
instead of implying a safe and permanent independence for the 
hard-working labourer and his family, implies for the most part 
only a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a 
pauperism which, during the whole circuit, is so near, that any 
illness or temporary failure of occupation necessitates imme- 
diate recourse to parochial relief — and thus all residence of 
agricultural population in a parish is glaringly an addition to 
its poor rates .... Large proprietors 2 . . . . have but to 
resolve that there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their 
estates, and their estates will thenceforth be virtually free 
from half their responsibility for the poor. How far it has 
been intended, in the English constitution and law, that this 
kind of unconditional property in land should be acquirable, 
and that a landlord, 'doing as he wills with his own,' should 
be able to treat the cultivators of the soil as aliens, whom he 
may expel from his territory, is a question which I do not pre- 
tend to discuss .... For that (power) of eviction .... does 
not exist only in theory. On a very large scale it prevails in 
practice — prevails .... as a main governing condition in the 
household circumstances of agricultural labour . . . . As regards 

1 In 1865 this law was improved to some extent. It will soon be learnt from ex- 
perience that tinkering of this sort is of no use. 

2 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that "Close 
Villages " are those whose owners are one or two large landlords. " Op ^n villages," 
those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. It is in the latter that building 
■speculators can build cottages and lodging-houses. 



77i C I ' imulaiii n. J 

the extent of the i vil, it may suffice I 
which Dr. I f 1 1 1 1 t . - 1 li • piled from tl. 

itructton of h tiding increased l"<-al demandi 

them, bad, daring the las( ten \ n in pr-ji.-^ in 

wnshi] I I .• .-lan-l. so t bat irres] 
ttvel who had been forced to I 

(hat i in the pal in which they work tl ami 

d L861 i ' with I 3 51 . ■ 

population 5 1 p< i cent - bouse-room t] pei 

N'-^s .... Wlit-n th< <!»• population baa 

!•• result, .;. I>> II. ■ a show-Tillage where the 

•,I p b< re none 
• <|. «1 . rphi-pl ma- 

lm- . i s ■• the 

•ooi| treatment osual to their class, 1 Bat the land requ 
eolt round that the lafa 

i n are not the tenai >n ner,Dat that t b 

bouring open village, j three miles <»tt', wlp-re a 

nun. imal] li.fl i ! tliriii wln-n til 

I in tin- <•!•>>.• \i liases aroiin«l. \\ i 
thin tending to tl 1 1 ;i _:< - whi.h 

in their unrepaired and wretched condil 
'i t<. which ' 

While the 
• .4. tli.i, the perm and 

; i he will of 1 ■ t<» <1m r tlu< pi 

I . ll I shall it 1. .-. i\. . 

neb ai it 1 ]•- mill-- ■ i can Hup] tad 11 ben at last 

it 1m-.-.. in. mi i 11 li.il unmlial'itaM. tln« 

bambl 

ige, aii'l tut up j will 1 10 somcu hat li. 



\ 1 tmr$ m« •* unreal »• llM %ilU«jt« 

II mm 00 bar journey to ili« (nm«* la reevnl Um« the ihiphw t 
AM of Ian been i*riuhr«t from Umm thow vtlUfr . * r M» 

■bee)> l»fin of .»»... V. '40 acre*, which only employe the 1*1 --vjr of one HUU» 
rnli.o thn !.>(,,£ tf WiM • ■■», r K.. «. | { .\. j-Iaw •. t !■• I- a . I ; f i.l | *« '. 1 1 ' ■ ' I » tl < • t' f *!»• I 

*m|>ton, the tbepbeeU umd Id gel ft WiHf! oo Ibe Urn 

ir lodgiog, th*t !»• nail flo«l f»» *■ • 



704 Capitalist Production. 

While great owners are thus escaping from poor-rates through 
the depopulation of lands over which they have control, the 
nearest town or open village receive the evicted labourers : the 
nearest, I say, but this "nearest " may mean three or four miles 
distant from the farm where the labourer has his daily toil. 
To that daily toil there will then have to be added, as though 
it were nothing, the daily need of walking six or eight miles 
for power of earning his bread. And whatever farm- work is 
done by his wife and children, is done at the same disadvan- 
tage. Nor is this nearly all the toil which the distance 
occasions him. In the open village, cottage-speculators buy 
scraps of land, which they throng as densely as they can with 
the cheapest of all possible hovels. And into those wretched 
habitations (which, even if they adjoin the open country, have 
some of the worst features of the worst town residences) crowd 
the agricultural labourers of Enoiand. 1 .... Nor on the other 
hand must it be supposed that even when the labourer is 
housed upon the lands which he cultivates, his household cir- 
cumstances are generally such as his life of productive industry 
would seem to deserve. Even on princely estates .... his 
cottage .... may be of the meanest description. There are 

1 " The labourers' houses (in the open villages, which, of course, are always over- 
crowded) are usually in rows, built with their backs against the extreme edge of the 
plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account are not allowed 
light and air, except from the front." (Dr. Hunter's Report, 1. c, p. 135.) Very 
often the beerseller or grocer of the village is at the same time the letter of its 
houses. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him a second master, besides 
the farmer. He must be his customer as well as his tenant. "The hind with his 
10s. a week, minus a rent of £4 a year .... is obliged to buy at the seller's own 
terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, candles, and beer." (1. c, p. 132.) 
These open villages form, in fact, the " penal settlements " of the English agricul- 
tural proletariat. Many of the cottages are simply lodging-houses, through which 
all the rabble of the neighbourhood passes. The country labourer and his family who 
had often, in a way truly wonderful, preserved, uuder the foulest conditions, a thorough- 
ness and purity of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. It is, of course, the 
fashion amongst the aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at 
the building speculators, the small landlords, and the open villages. They know well 
enough that their " close villages " and " show villages " are the the birth-places of the 
open villages, aud could not exist without them. " The labourers .... were it not 
for the small owners, would, for by far the most part, have to sleep under the trees 
of the farms on which they work." (1. c, p. 135.) The system of "open" and 
"closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties and throughout the East 
of England. 



Tk tral Law of Capital vlation 

good ir labo 1 ; 

family, and wh< him 

Um I It i: ; nous 

1 hut, : 

low, ii r'y : '* n " LT-ii • i'-ri— 

I ' the 

. . . up- .... a in--' 

their wnrkiri 
ownen m I the Lai 

I'm bl 
reqoi bion should again 

Im- di rwheli which 

• *ch to the civiliz .'I Lam- i 

>.-. wln-n, notwithstanding all I 

evidi : i.Miit acruiiiini 

il infinitely less 
the 

i^s haa been n m. 

sons who car cent ami moot] 

•gain in phrases ao sn-m 

u-»- in rural 

the i imp 

nct« wl 
less task, 

i An : it ha 

tan din ■alubriou.H intlm n< i«-h 

• ■ 

profit on * toAO nnj.|«»jr..l *t !•►« a week, OA«l reeetvtr 

IBDU* r boueee out worth ASK) in * 

irtiftcukl *»!ur by tbe pi • ue owner %•> aojr ' ..«*•«•. or go oeek 

•loeobcr*. wilboul • eh | room*/ DMIM . . •.. i 

u ft |'l»t- Uy.-r .■• -egtn qui .• ««• poo. 

io»*lj %4 oofeo, or bogooe il a * 

i \*i joo ooa for lb* poUloo* 

••* beilor eervetl by il. »n lolwinii r«. 
MJtnrt intra j. r . f. rr. I in !}.«••. re •*•(••. • ■».. r i< '.i.t f*r;...r M t-'.< poBftltJ f*»« 

Uovii 



jo6 Capitalist Production. 

extension of contagious disease, also favours the origination of 
disease which is not contagious. And those who have de- 
nounced the over-crowded state of our rural population have 
not been silent as to a further mischief. Even where their 
primary concern has been only with the injury to health, often 
almost perforce they have referred to other relations on the 
subject. In showing how frequently it happens that adult 
persons of both sexes, married and unmarried, are huddled 
together in single small sleeping rooms, their reports have 
carried the conviction that, under the circumstances thev 
describe, decency must always be outraged, and morality almost 
of necessity must suffer. 1 Thus, for instance, in the appendix of 
my last annual report, Dr. Ord, reporting on an outbreak of fever 
at Wing, in Buckinghamshire, mentions how a young man who 
had come thither from Wingrave with fever, "in the first daj^s of 
his illness slept in a room with nine other persons. Within a 
fortnight several of these persons were attacked, and in the 
course of a few weeks five out of the nine had fever, and one died" 
. . . . From Dr. Harvey, of St. George's Hospital, who, on 
private professional business, visited Wing during the time of 
the epidemic, I received information exactly in the sense of the 
above report . ..." A young woman having fever, lay at night 
in a room occupied by her father and mother, her bastard 
child, two young men (her brothers), and her two sisters, each 
with a bastard child — 10 persons in all. A few weeks ago 13 
persons slept in it." 2 

Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural lab- 
ourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all 
counties of England. Of these, 2,195 had only one bed- 

1 " New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and sisters ; 
and though instances must not be reco; ded, sufficient data are remembered to warrant 
the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are the lot of the female 
participator in the offence of incest." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 137.) A member of the 
rural police who had for many years been a detective in the worst quarters of London 
says of the girls of his village : "their boldness and shamelessness I never saw equalled 
during some years of police life and detective duty in the worst parts of London. 
.... They live like pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in 
one room, in many instances." (Child. Empl. Com. Sixth Report, 1867, p. 77 sq 
155.) 

2 Public Health. Seventh Report, 1864, pp. 9, 14 passim. 



The C mr of Capital tibm, 

d hi I he mom time nted a^ livin inly 

and 250, more than tw.j. I will gh 

eoli tiities. 

(1 Bl Dl 0BD8HUU 

IT I ','1 [0 1 

alth dler than thi T 

n divi 
ntlv in a kitchen, ' t l: 

] their own] 

lord .'i holo A hi i i 

. •■ uf ! ■ 

1 1 : 

pi I ■ ! ' 

-> in 

the chim- 
I irood like mi ele] nk 

I 

v an- 1 17 

1 til--- 
with on< 
idol! children, I 

I! i-si.ftl, 

10 i . tin- the 

y. Tl 

living with 4 cl.il- 
• • I 
• • in I long • 10 l • road* 

A 1 1 1 1 h • » 1 1 s r W 1 

• 1 tin . : 

Hi ; th< 
' oloti 

1 !.!f a 
i nil tleah. 
■ 
m than tl». • -nwade 

1 



708 Capitalist Production. 

(2.) Berkshire. 

Beenham. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children 
lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). A daughter came home 
from service with scarlet fever. She died. One child sickened 
and died. The mother and one child were down with typhus 
when Dr. Hunter was called in. The father and one child 
slept outside, but the difficulty of securing isolation was seen 
here, for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay 
the linen of the fever-striken household, waiting for the wash. 
The rent of H.'s house, Is. a week ; one bedroom for man, wife, 
and 6 children. One house let for 8d. a-week, 14 feet 6 inches 
long, 7 feet broad ; kitchen, 6 feet high ; the bedroom without 
window, fire-place, door, or opening, except into the lobby ; no 
garden. A man lived here for a little while, with two grown- 
up daughters and one grown-up son ; father and son slept on 
the bed, the girls in the passage. Each of the latter had a 
child while the family was living here, but one went to the 
workhouse for her confinement and then came home. 

(3.) Buckinghamshire. 

30 cottages — on 1,000 acres of land — containedhere about 130- 
140 persons. The parish of B radenham comprises 1,000 acres; 
it numbered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 males 
and 54 females. This inequality of the sexes was partly 
remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 
females ; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33 women. 
Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less. 

Winslow. Great part of this newly built in good style ; de- 
mand for houses appears very marked, since very miserable 
cots let at Is. to Is. 3d. per week. 

Water Eaton. Here the landlords, in view of the increas- 
ing population, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the exist- 
ing houses. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to 
his work, answered the question, whether he could not find a 
cot nearer : " No ; they know better than to take a man in 
with my large family." 



The General Law o) Accumulatx * 709 

VV, /.' /, near Win-! ,w. A no in which Wi n I 

i \ children ; 11 fed 
incbet high .-it its hi[ I ; another II' 

10 inches i. I . ( iese 

families lja«l ! I lian i> «•* »n - !■ !• i . « 1 i 

rm I 4cL to 

I In 1 ( : I 1 - 

q and 
coo 

in a 1 4 feet i 

the wli 

■ • 

I I lAMBHIDOl >iiii:i 

[• 

A-j.Iui' 
" A 

IP'S in 

I loatb, \\ bei 

<1 thi 

pad ''4MB l> 

In tl . diminut 

in nirtiiv | Hi- 1 i 

tl. i' 

Mirreane 

hich, un ' 

: I 
in I • I I : '• I 

1 ■ i-i- llli t 

I I 
1 'ml Bfll, Ml | • I 

In I . i , , 7 acr. 



710 Capitalist Production. 

houses ; at the end of ten years, 180 persons in 27 houses. In 
the parishes of Fingringhoe, South Farnbridge, Widford, Basil- 
den, and Ramsden Crags, in 1851, 1392 persons were living on 
8449 acres in 316 houses ; in 1861, on the same area, 1473 
persons in 249 houses. 

(6.) Herefordshire. 

This little county has suffered more from the " eviction- 
spirit" than any other in England. At Nadby, over-crowded 
cottages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the 
most part to the farmers. They easily let them for £3 or £4 
a-year, and paid a weekly wage of 9s. 

(7.) Huntingdon. 

Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 
cottages were destroyed in this small parish of 1720 acres ; 
population in 1831, 452; in 1852, 832 ; and in 1861, 341. 14 
cottages, each with 1 bedroom, were visited. In one, a married 
couple, 3 grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in 
all 10 ; in another, 3 adults, 6 children. One of these rooms, 
in which 8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 
inches broad, 6 feet 9 inches high : the average, without 
making any deduction for projections into the apartment, 
gave about 130 cubic feet per head. In the 14 sleeping 
rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. These cottages are seldom 
provided with gardens, but many of the inmates are able to 
farm small allotments at 10s. or 12s. per rood. These allot- 
ments are at a distance from the houses, which are without 
privies. The family " must either go to the allotment to de- 
posit their ordures," or, as happens in this place, saving your 
presence, "use a closet with a trough set like a drawer in a 
chest of drawers, and drawn out weekly and conve} T ed to the 
allotment to be emptied where its contents were wanted." In 
Japan, the circle of life-conditions moves more decently than 
this. 

(8.) Lincolnshire. 
Langtoft. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his 



7/u C ' f Capitalist Accumulation, 711 

•rife, hei mother, rod 5 children; the h< 1 a front kit- 

chen, scall torn over the front kitchen ; front kitchen 

en I be Iroom l 2 "> in<-l, 

I 2 inch 

i n to 1 

r-window 0] in h " Why <li'i 

I . ... . \ 

ill. R High, ] 3d. ] k. N work I 

miles a Ike daily, to and fi 12 mi 

I I lived i here, because it rase 

1 to hai 

; !i any OOndii >Uowi] ' • • ■ 

of 1 2 I. .'.itii IS •' 3 

children. 



■ 



l 



, • 






I 

\ 



. 



j 

E 






i 



: 

• 

.. M 
.. n 
.. It 












l\ < I IT 1 1 v 

•llj.l 

irnjun \ ii II 

thai 

pad and 1 

fo||n '■' 



7 12 Capitalist Production. 

Kitchen : ft. 5 by 8 ft. 11 by G ft. 6. 
Scullery : 8 ft. 6 by 4 ft. 6 by 6 ft. G. 
Bedroom : 8 ft. 5 by 5 ft. 10 by 6 ft. 3. 
Bedroom : 8 ft. 3 by 8 ft. 4 by 6 ft. 3. 

(10.) Northamptonshire. 

Brinworth, Pickford and Floore : in these villages in the 
winter 20 — 30 men were lounging about the streets from want 
of work. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn 
and turnip lands, and the landlord has found it best to throw 
all his farms together into 2 or 3. Hence want of employ- 
ment. Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour, 
on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it 
longing glances. Feverishly overworked in summer, and half- 
starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar 
dialect, " the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death at 
them." 

At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of 
couples with 4, 5, 6 children ; 3 adults with 5 children ; a 
couple with grandfather and 6 children down with scarlet 
fever, &c. ; in two houses with two bedrooms, two families of 
8 and 9 adults respectively. 

(11.) Wiltshire. 

Stratton. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. 
Pentili, in the same parish : a cot let at Is. 3d. weekly with 4 
adults and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the 
walls, from the floor of rough -hewn pieces of stones to the 
roof of worn-out thatch. 

(12.) Worcestershire. 

House-destruction here not quite so excessive ; yet from 1851 
to 1861, the number of inhabitants to each house on the average, 
has risen from 4*2 to 4G. 

Badsey. Many cots and little gardens here. Some of the 
farmers declare that the cots are " a great nuisance here, be- 
cause they bring the poor." On the statement of one gentle- 



7/ xeral Law of Capitalist Accumu 

1 1 1 - 1 r i : " Tl. them ; if j 

they will i 

they want " hira th»- 

inh.; , who then bj 

of L J )v 1 [onter romai .. ^ poor i 

. 

.siirli ulsion Jroin e 

unfit pi i them If ;1«1 find 

Allotment n 

r bis i inch m i dm r | 

h 

Ti • inu.il ! 

Lion |.\ i in 

iof in 

1 1 1 • • i r | 
mean* of emploj 

• 

great'-r, th< -••> ia tip- local turpi 

lagee and sin 

.; of the agi 
dimini ihing numtx i an I iocreai 

able 

an I tnakea than dm i 1 1 » • • 

mi ii i in *i in ol wagea becomes a law 

He too itoof* iw t im to 

'<!Wf to* U c»u«i 

operation of Ibt vtriotM U ■ * 



714 Capitalist Production. 

Nature to them. On the other hand, the land, in spite of its 
constant "relative surplus-population," is at the same time 
under-populated. This is seen, not only locally at the points 
where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad-making, &c.,is 
most marked. J t is to be seen everywhere, in harvest-time as 
well as in spring and summer, at those frequently recurring 
times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants 
extra hands. There are always too many agricultural labourers 
for the ordinaiy, and always too few for the exceptional or 
temporary needs of the cultivation of the soil. 1 Hence we find 
in the official documents contradictory complaints from the 
same places of defyciency and excess of labour simultane- 
ously. The temporary or local want of labour brings about no 
rise in wa^es, but a forcing of the women and children into 
the fields, and exploitation at an age constantly lowered. As 
soon as the exploitation of the women and children takes place 
on a larger scale, it becomes in turn a new means of making a 
surplus-population of the male agricultural labourer and of 
keeping down his wage. In the east of England thrives a 
beautiful fruit of this vicious circle — the so-called gang-system, 
to which I must briefly return here. 2 

Mutiny Act affect the other." (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132.) Sometimes an excep- 
tionally soft-hearted landlord relents at the solitude he has created. " It is a 
melancholy thing to stand alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when com- 
plimented on the completion of Hookham. "I look around and not a house is to 
be seen but mine. I am the giant of Giant Castle, and have eat up all my neigh- 
bours. " 

1 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France ; in proportion as 
capitalist production there takes possession of agriculture, it drives the "surplus" 
agricultural population into the towns. Here also we find deterioration in the housing 
and other conditions at the source of the surplus -population. On the special " pro- 
letariat foncier," to which this system of parcelling out the land has given rise, see, 
among others, the work of Colins, already quoted, and Karl Marx " Der Achtzehnte 
Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte." 2nd edition. Hamburg, 1869, pp 56, &c. In 
1846, the town population in France was represented by 24*42, the agricultural by 
75'58 ; in 1861, the town by 28'86, the agricultural by 71'4 per cent. During the 
last 5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population has been 
yet more marked. As early as 18-16, Pierre Dupont in his " Ouvriers " sang : 

Mai vetus, loges dans des trous, 

Sous les combles, dans les decombres, 

Nous vivons avec les hiboux 

Et les larrons, amis des ombres. 
2 "Sixth and last Beport of the Children's Employment Commission, " published 
at the end of March, 1867. It deals solely with the agricultural. 



Tlu C ' t ' Accumulai 

Tr • 1 v in the cooi 

of Lincoln, Hunt rfolk, 

Ltingham. here and there in the neiffhbou 
rthampl :i, !'• II and Rutland LL >lnahire will sen 
A I u _'•• part of tbia countj w land, 

r«>ni. in oth< ■ ■ intiee 

nan. Tin- 

irondei t drain W .• ■ 

laxm i.'int -a o( (•••rn aii'l tin- l.i_ 
Of rani 1 (if the alluvial I l>v 

human ir, ;h in the axholme and 

•.t. I n pi 

• 
detn ■ be supply of labour bad Fi om 

•. villages, mil I iround the 

i bad ti tion formerly 

the inoeaaaii' « mi- i 

:t dwell on tli<- Eai m 

;ij»li»y«'.l on Rich 
iltmal work as t, difficult 

I on 1>\ • i 

\ 
1 roe, all 

i 

1 •r.Hcinrll 1 

\\'.- get 1 I •• s«»il it qu 

' ' U lal ich as wt 

censes • 

' 1U. II III t i . \ I...I •• 

; •• • 

I ' Iga, although ti 

the agi» oi l 
children <>f l> <>tli I age). At ti 

. 
i called a l»a«l l 

1 1 
-mi t 

<1»IW. Emp. (Wn M I.-- J7. 



7 1 6 Capitalist Production. 

the farmer. He generally arranges with the latter for piece- 
work, and his income, which on the average is not very much 
above that of an ordinary agricultural labourer, 1 depends almost 
entirely upon the dexterity with which he manages to extract 
within the shortest time the greatest possible amount of labour 
from his gang. The farmers have discovered that women 
work steadily only under the direction of men, but that women 
and children, once set going, impetuously spend their life-force 
— as Fourier knew — while the adult male labourer is shrewd 
enough to economise his as much as he can. The gang-master 
goes from one farm to another, and thus employs his gang from 
6 to 8 months in the year. Employment by him is, therefore 
much more lucrative and more certain for the labouring fami- 
lies, than employment by the individual farmer, who only 
employs children occasionally. This circumstance so com- 
pletely rivets his influence in the open villages that children 
are generally only to be hired through his instrumentality- 
The lending out of these individually, independently of the 
gang, is his second trade. 

The " drawbacks " of the system are the over- work of the 
children and young persons, the enormous marches that they 
make daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles 
distant, finally, the demoralisation of the gang. Although the 
gangmaster, who. in some districts is called " the driver," is 
armed with a long stick, he uses it but seldom, and complaints 
of brutal treatment are exceptional. He is a democratic em- 
peror, or a kind of Pied Piper of Hamelin. He must therefore 
be popular with his subjects, and he binds them to himself by 
the charms of the gipsy life under his direction. Coarse free- 
dom, a noisy jollity, and obscenest impudence give attractions 
to the gang. Generally the gangmaster pays up in a public 
house ; then he returns home at the head of the procession reel- 
ing drunk, propped up right and left by a stalwart virago 
while children and young persons bring up the rear, boisterous, 
and singing chaffing and bawdy songs. On the return journey 
what Fourier calls " phanerogamie," is the order of the day. 

1 Some gangmasters, however, have worked themselves up to the position of farmers 
of 500 acres, or proprietors of whole rows of houses. 



The C '/ Law oj Capitalist Accumulai 

i L4 bj .11.- 

the *ii\iiu age i 

ply the contingent 
morrab rate i 

■ ni. The moral cb 
in tl I women, u;i^ uhown 

:i opium -] 

boi n recruit - of the _ r -ui_'. 

: mi jn ' 

pul.. trampii I . • 

• .1 1 . ;• in I v ju the oomi 

r mem i gang- 

me old lai in 

v. T 
has van uesaes, the paym 

■ 
in, u bioh during the lily 

v 1 and indirectly 

Of t i . 4 I 

: mal 1- 
and h big an i 

possible amown! of lai ith t),.> 

• and 

! 

I l.»vo bc«a ruined I . 

inorMMil at Utc y. am In ioidi pUooa they ar« 
to h*v« b«cii intrutluc* I » uero gai** 

have been known for nunjr fHII iour« Mid young- I ■ axo en., 

• 

rn.»ll f*i 

I ul> *»» 

■ 

former g*i>grn**t«r 

r iL« i. 



/i8 Capitalist Production. 

will be understood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack 
of employment for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while 
on the other, the gang-system is at the same time declared 
" necessary " on account of the want of adult male labour and 
its migration to the towns. 1 The cleanly weeded land, and the 
uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole and counter- 
pole of capitalistic production. 2 

1 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used to be done 
by men and women. More men are out of work now where children and women are 
employed than formerly." (1. c, p. 43, n. 202.) On the other hand, "the labour 
question in some agricultural districts, particularly the arable, is becoming so serious 
in consequence of emigration, and the facility afforded by railways for getting to large 
towns that I (the " I " is the steward of a great lord) think the services of children 
are most indispensable." (1. c, p. 80, n. 180.) For the "labour question" in Eng- 
lish agricultural districts, differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the 
landlords' and farmers' question viz., how it is possible, despite an always increasing 
exodus of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative surplus-population in 
the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer at a 
minimum ? 

' 2 The "Public Health Keport," where in dealing with the subject of children's 
mortality, the gang-system is treated in passing, remains unknown to the press, and, 
therefore, to the English public. On the other hand, the last report of the " Child. 
Empl. Comm." afforded the press sensational copy always welcome. Whilst the 
Liberal press asked how the fine gentlemen and ladies, and the well-paid clergy of 
the State Church, with whom Lincolnshire swarms, could allow such a system to 
arise on their estates, under their very eyes, they who send out expressly missions to 
the Antipodes, " for the improvement of the morals of South Sea Islanders " — the 
more refined press confined itself to reflections on the coarse degradation of the agri- 
cultural population who are capable of selling their children into such slavery ! 
Under the accursed conditions to which these " delicate" people condemn the agri- 
cultural labourer, it would not be surprising if he ate his own children. What is 
really wonderful is the healthy integrity of character, he has, in great part, retained. 
The official reports prove that the parents, even in the gang districts, loathe the 
gang-system. "There is much in the evidence that show that the parents of the 
children would, in many instances, be glad to be aided by the requirements of a legal 
obligation, to resist the pressure and the temptations to which they are often subject. 
They are liable to be urged, at times by the parish officers, at times by employers, 
under threats of being themselves discharged, to be taken to work at an age when 

. . . school attendance . . . would be manifestly to their greater advantage 

All that time and strength wasted ; all the suffering from extra and unprofitable 
fatigue produced to the labourer and to his children ; every instance in which the parent 
may have traced the moral ruin of his child to the undermining of delicacy by the 
overcrowding of cottages, or to the contaminating influences of the public gang, must 
have been so many incentives to feelings in the minds of the labouring poor which 
can be well understood, and which it would be needless to particularise. They must 
be conscious that much bodily and mental pain has thus been inflicted upon them 
from causes for which they were in no way answerable ; to which, had it been in their 
power, they would have in no way consented ; and against which they were power- 
less to struggle." (1. c, p. xx., § 82, and xxiii., n. 9t>.) 



7 h Gi n ral I. ra / Ca/ i ; 



I 111 I. WI>. 

In ran. 

. md I'n *, the nmi 
Th 
in L851, i( had dwindled t in 1861, 1 

in I • million-, I in 1801 

diroinul i with I 

in 1< than , tfa 

.1 ••mi 

: rlurin 

I . 
■ I i ■ i : i the 

in 
I • ' total nui. 

■ 

I 

I ! 



Ytmr. 


II rtt 




D*er«ftM. 1 iHiwmm, 






.,,.• - .i 


11.338 
23.910 

1 l.'J91 


• • 
3,144 


• 


mtjm 



.33,0*4. 






/2Q 



Capitalist Production. 



j 

i Year. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


Total Number. 


Decrease. 


Increase. 


Total Number. 


Decrease. 


Increase. 


1860 

i 


3,542,080 






1,271,072 






! 1861 


3,556,050 




13,970 


1,102,042 


169,030 




1862 


3,456,132 


99,918 




1,154,324 




52,282 


1863 


3,308,204 


147,982 




1,067,458 


86,866 




1864 


3,366,941 




58,737 


1,058,480 


8,978 




1865 


3,688,742 




321,801 


1,299,893 




241,413 



The decrease of the population was naturally accompanied 
by a decrease in the mass of products. For our purpose, it 
suffices to consider the 5 years from 1861-1865 during which 
over half-a-million emigrated, and the absolute number of 
people sank by more than \ of a million. 

From the above table it results : — 



Houses. 



Cattle. 



Sheep. 



Pigs. 



Absolute Decrease. 
72,358 



Absolute Decrease. Absolute Increase. ! Absolute Increase. 



116,626 



146,608 



28,819 1 



Let us now turn to agriculture, which yields the means of 
subsistence for cattle and for men. In the following table is 
calculated the decrease or increase for each separate year, as 
compared with its immediate predecessor. The Cereal Crops 



1 The result would be found yet more unfavourable if we went further back. 
Thus : Sheep in 1865, 3,688,742, but in 1856, 3,694,294. Pigs in 1865, 1,299,893, but 
in 1858, 1,409,883. 



The General La f Capitalist Accumulation. 721 
include wheat, otfte, bai . 1 pet { roen 

•-, turnip 

pai 



. Tin: a KM A] 

OEAfll IN a< 



1 Ml 






A> r • I 



■ 



Acre*. Aanm. 

XV\7 



1 
1 






7.7-M 



M^flN 






•J."''*- 






ttMM 



i 



A. r. v 

i:> Ml 
■ i:;s 

hum 



A r. « 






In tli- \ • H ' a-Hiti-nnl 

[fcf flint; ' LTlUi« lm : rvn tin 

' ] 366 with is<; v thci 

i 

' 1 ■ in 



722 



Capitalist Production. 



r»0 



H 
O 
P 

Q 
O 
Ph- 
Ph 

< 

H 
O 
H 

Q 
<J 

P3 
Q 
<J 

PS 
Pw 

H 
O 
P 

Q; 
o ; 

Ph 



H 

rEH 

i— ( 

P 

O 

o 



o 

M 
EH 
<4 

t> 

i— i 

EH 
H 
P 
O 

P3 

fc *-' 
P Ph 



P4 
W 



w. 

< 

PS 
O 

o 

<} 

w 

P5 

o 





^ 


























as 
so 




CO 




" ; 


s 


09 


2 






CO 




c3 
OS 




© 


LO <M 


_i 


oo 


so 






ICS 








5 


o © 


r- 


a 


I>- 






rH 




O 




© 


so 00 


i-H 


CO 


OS 






© 




OS 




























oo 


SO © 


I-H 


o 


m 






rH 




fi lO 




rH 


SO CM 




•<* 


so 






CM 




M © 
o «> 






l-H 




-* 


rH 


































co 










CO 






09 

-H> 


" 




5 




ea 










■^< 






CO 


t» 




rH 




OS 










OO 






»o 


l>- 




■a 


S-. 










SO 






SO 


00 




to 


£> 
























£> 












in 






tjT 


cm" 




I-H 


Q 
O 
















-* 


m 




© 
rH 
































oa « 








OS 








*» CO 


Ph 






Hi " 








H-3 








CO -HI 






G?M 


i— *- 


OS >* 


o 


co 


t» 


CM 


rH Jt~ 


Hi 






00 


CM i-H 


OO so 


CS 


oo 


CO 


m 


O © 




so 


t~ 


t- ©_ 


C5 CO 


°^ 


SO 


OS_ 


°*- 


lO K 


H 




oo 


so 


of <m" 


co* oo 


in 


I-H* 


r-T 


o" 


© oo" 


o 




?-t 


CM 


iO CO 


i-H i-H 


o 


o 


OS 


m 


eo co 


H 






00 


SO 1^ 




oo 

CO 


CO 


rH 


CO 




CO 






CO •* 




n ^ 


- „ 


CQ 


„ 


„ 


„ 


-^" ai 








Sh " 








-u 








co -*^ 








O'CM 


CM 05 


OO 


oo 


OS 


rH 


«5 


© CO 








oo 


CO o 


SO 00 


oo 


m 


CO 


t- 


O «5 






rH 

so 


f~ 


co o 


tH SO_ 


co^ 


so 


CM 


eo_ 


lO rH, 






oo 


in 


«o zi 


iri"cM" 


of 


j>- 


i>T 


t-T 


rH* iC 






T-i 


t— 


CM SO 


l-H rH 


1-4 


SO 


rH 


© 


SO O 








00 


oo t» 




CO 


co" 


rH 


CM 




SO 
CM* 




OS 




eo 




o 


SO 


»c 


rH 






© 




. © 




© 




rH 


r4 


o 


O 






Oi 




5s oo 


























Or-i 


























OS n 


























<n as 


























o3 co 
OS c£ 

Hi OS 






CM 


OS 






00 


r-t 




CM 








c 




rH 






CM 


rH 




© 




O Hi 


























S3 O 


























M 






























© 


CO <35 


00 tM 


so 


OS 


CO 


rH 


CM 00 






so 

00 


CO 


CM -if 


4* o 


co 


OS 


co 


© 


in rH 






i-H 


i-H r4 


rH rH 






ri 


rH 


CM 






r-l 
























CD 


























o 


























CO 


l-H <3> 


"?* "P 


t-t 


CO 


ip 


co 


CM © 






CO 


CM IO 


SO 00 


Tjt 


O 


© 


OS 


rH ^H 




CD 




rH 


rH I-H 


I-H 




l-H 


rH 




CO 




A 












0? 












•ta 












C 










O 

o 
HI 

Ph 


rH 

SO 

oo 

l-H 


-4J 

o 

"cl 


Oats, ,, 
Barley, ,, 


OS >t 

PhPh 


o 

09* 

as 
o 

03 
O 

Ph 


.2* 


2 


-i as 
as bo 

is c3 


Flax, st. (14 
Hay, tons, 








rH 


oo 


—*~~> 




CO 






c 






<D 




© 


lA 






TJ( 






© 




A^ 




r)i 


SO 






rH 






CN 










oT 


csT 






co" 






© 








so 












lO 




as » 
CO as 
c3 w 






























CM 


t~- 


so 




so 


i-H 




rH 




<D o3 








O 


Gi 


CO 




rH 


© 




CM 




;-. OS 








"<# 


!-<_ 


m_ 




CO 


CO 




© 












<* 


r-T 


so 

CM 






r-T 




00 

© 




M 


! 
























•a 

CD 




© 


CO CM 


i-H 


o 


CM 


© 


CM 


co co 






00 


CM O 


OS 


SO 


rH 


CO 


CM 


eo © 




ia 


© 


CM i-H 


o 


CM 


CM 


00 


© 


rf 


rH 




■*^ 
























£? 


so 


SO 


m i~- 


o 


so 


tH 


rH 


co 




00 




> 


oo 


SO 


tji i>. 


l-H 


so 


CO 


rH 


CO 


kC 


*■• 




33 


•H 


<M 


J^ l-H 




©^ 


CO 






Cn 


SO 




of Cul 
Land. 






i-T 




!-T 










I-H* 






CO 


so o 


•«* 


■<n 


m 


co 


I-H 


CO © 






oo 


00 o 


OS 


(M 


m 


t^ 


CM 


o 


© 






rjt 


oo r- 


00 


1>- 


CO 


© 


00 


SO 


m 




m 


























OS 


SO 


so 


-<* IM 


CO 


OS 


i-- 


rH 


l-H 


r-i 


© 




h 


00 


i~ 


r-l l^ 




CO 


co 


i-H 


CO 


© 




o 


l-H 


<M 


0O r-\ 




o 


eo 






cc 


so 




^ 1 






i-T 




l-H 










rH 














































as 


























N 














• 














Hi 














H 










* 


^ 


3 


J 























CO 




ss 


«T 












ft 










as 


09* 


•6 


as 












o 

Ph 


•*> 
d 
9 

.3 


V 

-*- 


0) 


gfg 


o 

-4-2 


'2 

Hi 


to 
a 


^0 


k 

rt 


^ 








F 


c 


1 c3 


CD >> 


O 


3 


ci 


rt 


eS 








c 


Ph 


PhPh 


Ph 


H 


HH 


O 


s 


w 



>-H ~ m ^s ►» 

- . ^ ^r SL « 

30 I? *5 L* cS<M 

of 1 M » C^^ 1 



O 3 ^-l 'S ^ r*« **— . 

C ft,-^ « §<2 .„co 

rS „.S o CO 5 *' 

O 0) ^ ^ *" O 0=4- 

H< SPesS co.iio O 

kh eg ^S ^ o -»s • . 

s- co ^ hi eS rti O 

« g r-, .S § " a 2 



e3 -£? o aT-^op^ 



1*4 

c3 7, o CO S 



<~ Sol 

o o 3 o 2 

2 — '© a 

co -to •— _.- « 

<C (j ocs ^ 

'■ o ml': ' 



^ '43 EH 

e3 co 

HI o> 

3 „, • 



3hj.s «j3 <M o> 

•a SPrq'- ^r-o"^ 



» o g 



He? *i 
t — . 

00 « 



~ o o o co 
j[J a O o ^ O o ] 

«h,hO® cS.fi^O^ 
S3 . co as o 00 e 

i-Hr-- r> .i— i (I 



43,5 r^^J 
c| as jzj tw 

rS « S O 

■e o 



£ "* ■* a 

sh c3 <^ ;r* hj 

"^ "^ S S3 r- 



S3 c3'.^ Ci. 
?8 f ^ ^ O" 



: «2 § o.S 



^3 ca 



as o °° 

^- 09 

h. o 09 o ~a 

iu S c3 r 3 ^o?^^^ 
M^rH « ^ j-OOO 

4S.S0 

Q,tjca3 e3 co— -a>o 

-f< X> .^ 09 

o^ — fl 'V cs 

^ - r-5 .5 O t> as - 
r-H«§ S*^^ 1 U t> 

rC S < rJ"0'2 «S 

* °°-^ «« i 

O QJ -X ** ** CO *■* 

sErHr-HCM-S 0> 
(JoOfc gCO o9,Q 

••§22 £^ g«rfal 



r-H g I CM 

c3 W 



as , 

CD CO 



2"^ r« 



ci 



05 S ° -G - 



The General L 

I >m tli ... . 

land] »rd and industrial ca J I 

I in the riafl the I: ' II It I 

lule D with t ; 

tho so-calK-' rial " 

■ 
1 in which I 

ii 






lata 



lao. uaa 



1364. iaoa 



- 



i 

Mom. i i» l» 



i a m v «a 






• 



,NM0 



I.-. ■■.-.■, | i ., m i m.i ■: 












UOO»U0 



h;mjm u.i.v.;.-,7i *6bmh njmm njmvm 



i ti.'lul.' 1) t) rag© aiinu 

I aamo I, in 

< .s I he folio* ing i 

i i - 









724 



Capitalist Production. 



Table E. 

SCHEDULE D. INCOME FROM PROFITS (OVER £60) IN IRELAND. 



Total yearly income 
of 

Yearly income over 
£60 and under £100 

Of the yearly total 
income 

Remainder of the 
total yearly income 



Of these. 



1864. 
£. 



1865. 
£. 



4,368,610 divided among 

17,467 persons. 



238,626 „ 5,015 



1,979,066 

2,150,818 

1,083,906 

1,066,912 

430,535 

646,377 

262,610 



, 11,321 

, 1,131 
910 
121 
105 

, 26 
3 



4,669,979 divided among 

18,081 persons. 



222,575 „ 4,703 

2,028,471 „ 12,184 

2,418,933 „ 1,194 

1,097,937 ,, 1,044 

1,320,996 „ 186 

584,458 ,, 122 

736,448 „ 28 

264,528 „ 3 



England, a country with fully developed capitalist produc- 
tion, and pre-eminently industrial, would have bled to death 
with such a drain of population as Ireland has suffered. But 
Ireland is at present only an agricultural district of England, 
marked off by a wide channel from the country to which it 
yields corn, wool, cattle, industrial and military recruits. 

The depopulation of Ireland has thrown much of the land 
out of cultivation, has greatly diminished the produce of the 
soil, 2 and, in spite of the greater area devoted to cattle breed- 
ing, has brought about, in some of its branches, an absolute 
diminution, in others, an advance scarcely worthy of mention, 
and constantly interrupted by retrogressions. Nevertheless, 

1 The total yearly income under Schedule D. is different in this table from that 
which appears in the preceding ones, because of certain deductions allowed by law. 

2 If the product also diminishes relatively per acre, it must not be forgotten that 
for a century and a half England has indirectly exported the soil of Ireland, without 
as much as ailoiving its cultivators the means for making up the constituents of the 
soil that had been exhausted. 



The C 'inula: 

with the Jail in numbers of t: 

DOt ;u- iy as t :u-t. 

T1j> reason of this is easily oomj Od I 

arith the throwing of small holdings into large ones, and the 

change ble in! land, a laigsv p rhole 

into BOrplm pf ' ;»lu> 

I bioh it 

• i'.n, <l.«-i.:.i- -I. < hi ti. 
surpla increased yet m pidly I 

, in i in tli- !i inai 

I ■•• of i • ..ills 

dm ;n ■ 

leans i 
th'i », with 

apital than s pi osamed bj 

own j.t a Commodity. It', with tin n the popu- 

•n agricult 

• .limit! vs of tin- capital « - 1 1 1 1 1I03 

•sased, because a part of tlx* iix-u! 

ated ai i capital. 

in 
. 
slow l-tantl. 

i i» the i 

absolute in- 

riTiiM-, in |>i ■ •[>• -it !• -ii to the . 1 w 1 1 1 i " . 1 1 _- [Herniation it hail in- 
rgely. 

M 

ess* 

I 

i he plai?n<- in t Idld 

of ti. ■ I 

i 

I 



726 Capitalist Production. 

overlooked the fact that whilst, after the plague and the 
decimation that accompanied it, followed on this side of the 
channel, in England, enfranchisement and enrichment of the 
agricultural population, on that side, in France, followed 
greater servitude and more misery. 1 

The Irish famine of 1846 killed more than 1,000,000 people, 
but it killed poor devils only. To the wealth of the country 
it did not the slightest damage. The exodus of the next 20 
years, an exodus still constantly increasing, did not, as, e.g., the 
thirty years' war, decimate, along with the human beings, their 
means of production. Irish genius discovered an altogether 
new way of spiriting a poor people thousands of miles away 
from the scene of its misery. The exiles transplanted to the 
United States, send home sums of money every year as 
travelling expenses for those left behind. Every troop that 
emigrates one year, draws another after it the next. Thus, in- 
stead of costing Ireland anvthing, emigration forms one of the 
most lucrative branches of its export trade. Finally, it is a 
systematic process, which does not simply make a passing gap 
in the population, but sucks out of it every year more people 
than are replaced by the births, so that the absolute level of 
the population falls year by year. 2 

What were the consequences for the Irish labourers left be- 
hind and freed from the surplus-population ? That the rela- 
tive surplus-population is to-day as great as before 1846 ; that 
wages are just as low, that the oppression of the labourers has 
increased, that misery is forcing the country towards a new 
crisis. • The facts are simple. The revolution in agriculture 
has kept pace with emigration. The production of relative 
surplus-population has more than kept pace with the absolute 
depopulation. A glance at table C shows that the change of 
arable to pasture land must work yet more acutely in Ireland 

1 As Ireland is regarded as the promised land of the "principle of population," 
A. Sadler, before the publication of his work on population, issued his famous book, 
"Ireland, its evils and their remedies. 2nd edition, London, 1829." Here, by com- 
parison of the statistics of the individual provinces, and of the individual counties in 
each province, he proves that the misery there is not, as Malthus would have it, in 
proportion to the number of the population, but in inverse ratio to this. 

2 Between 1851 and 1874, the total number of emigrants amounted to 2,325,922. 



Th w of Capitalist Accumulatx t. ; 

than in El 1 1 1 the cull 

<i&Be& with th»* }'!•••• <lin I usee. 

Iar_'-- mi! Lie 

1 permanently inri 

I and peat i"_ r - that rlv, 

1 mediam farmei I reck n am -•• all who 

do nut. cultivate iimiv t} ■ ill ma 1 . 

of the whole number. 1 Tl id with 

a d( . ana] 

managed l>y capital, ami tl. 

tinu;ill\ to the rlniTfi of wage-lal 

1, lim-n-n 

»lt men and only employs altogether, in spite 

of il -• in 1 -'• I 1 

■n. Liki 
peat i I ly pn>«lm in- 

ceaaant tl- thin ita 

n with :■■■ in th 

him ad by il 1 : m 

whoee 
armies r.<l <•. 

1 1. 
aboi bich in andei 

'.. poaacaaea ita ou r ;anpen 

a aa would n-Milt in a i 

the bom 

!■••, lir 

liminuti<<n in inoomea be* 

\ lie agrirulti. 

lnhour-i in Ireland ia (•• 1 • i uml in th.< I;, port - i the In h 



- 

ol of tfe boWio*. do ooi rcocb oi 1UU urn 



728 



Capitalist Production. 



Poor Law Inspectors (1870). 1 Officials of a government which 
is maintained only by bayonets and by a state of siege, now 
open, now disguised, they have to observe all the precautions 
of language that their colleagues in England disdain. In spite 
of this, however, they do not let their government cradle itself 
in illusions. According to them the rate of wages in the 
country, still very low, has within the last 20 years risen 
50-60 per cent., and stands now, on the average, at 6s. to 9s. 
per week. But behind this apparent rise, is hidden an actual 
fall in wages, for it does not correspond at all to the rise in 
price of the necessary means of subsistence that has taken 
place in the meantime. For proof, the following extract from 
the official accounts of an Irish workhouse. 

Average Weekly Cost per Head. 



Year ended. 


Provisions and 
Necessaries. 


Clothing. 


i 
Total. 


29th Sept., 1849. 
1869. 


Is. 3Jd. 
2s. 7|d 


3d. 
6d. 


Is. 6|d. 
3s. ljd. 

* 



The price of the necessary means of subsistence is therefore 
fullv twice, and that of clothing exactly twice, as much as 
they were 20 years before. 

Even apart from this disproportion, the mere comparison of 
the rate of wages expressed in gold would give a result far 
from accurate. Before the famine, the great mass of agricul- 
tural wages were paid in kind, only the smallest part in 
money ; to-day, payment in money is the rule. From this 
it follows that, whatever the amount of the real wage, its 
money rate must rise. " Previous to the famine, the labourer 
enjoyed his cabin .... with a rood, or half-acre or acre of 

1 " Reports from the Poor Law Inspectors on the wages of Agricultural Labourers 
in Dublin, 1870." See also "Agricultural Labourers (Ireland) Return, etc., 8 March. 
1862, London 1862." 



The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. 7 

land, and facilitii ... a crop of 1 • • 1 1 

hi.s pig and keep fowl . . Bat they 
bay bn .1 they ba irbich I 

i pi .'.], tod they hi [uently do benefit from the 

fowl, or ! In fact, formerly, tl 

I labourers were bat tip- smallest of the -mall farme 
formed for the m t a kind of 1 uard of the medium 

and lai n which they found employm ( 1 

the 1 1846 have they began to form a fractl • 

the class of purely waj 
v. iri. it wt only by monetary 1 

ffe know whi Litioua of their dwelling! in 

A ; • •' the 
a hich, hoi 
dwells Btill ■ holdings of the farmers in 01 irdedh 

uli .•-,!• }iiilivnisiios8 tar Mirj»av>».-*. tli t thai lish 

cultural labourer! offered di In this waj And thia holds 

rally with the exception o1 Ulster; in the 

ii, in • inl I I I- K ilk ; in 

toe east, in Wicklon W( ; in t 1 

in Kin I Dublin, &c. ; in tfa in 

S 1 i _' .. I; ^coinin ' ; ' ■ I 

ci ir.s nut, • . the 

< 'hi . n of t !. 

ase th the 

j •■•< of land bt'lon ne imi 

tli-- p • be landi >i 

1 hirth in tin; mil i ho lal 

«|M»riili 
: >iu t h- \ are ' 

a 1 1 catod as ... a 1 i 

'I'll tion wa to ■ 

r 
on the largest scale, and an it' in obedience to a oomi 

mi hi ;h I i 1 «-..tu|». Id 1 t 1 

I 

1 I 



J30 Capitalist Production. 

into garrets, holes, cellars and corners, in the worst back slums. 
Thousands of Irish families, who according to the testimony of 
the English, eaten up as these are w^ith national prejudice, are 
notable for their rare attachment to the domestic hearth, for 
their gaiety and the purity of their home-life, found them- 
selves suddenly transplanted into hotbeds of vice. The men 
are now obliged to seek work of the neighbouring farmers 
and are only hired by the day, and therefore under the most 
precarious form of wage. Hence " they sometimes have long 
distances to go to and from work, often get wet, and suffer 
much hardship, not unfrequently ending in sickness, disease 
and want." 1 

" The towns have had to receive from year to year what 
was deemed to be the surplus-labour of the rural division ; " 2 
and then people still wonder " there is still a surplus of labour 
in the towns and villages, and either a scarcity or a threatened 
scarcity in some of the country divisions." 3 The truth is that 
this want only becomes perceptible " in harvest-time, or during 
spring, or at such times as agricultural operations are carried 
on with activity ; at other periods of the year many hands are 
idle ; " 4 that " from the digging out of the main crop of potatoes 
in October until the early spring following . . . there is no em- 
plojmient for them ; " 5 and further, that during the active times 
they " are subject to broken days and to all kinds of interrup- 
tions." 6 

These results of the agricultural revolution — i.e., the change 
of arable into pasture land, the use of machinery, the most 
rigorous economy of labour, &c., are still further aggravated by 
the model landlords, who, instead of spending their rents in 
other countries, condescend to live in Ireland on their demesnes. 
In order that the law of supply and demand may not be broken, 
these gentlemen draw their " labour-supply . . . chiefly from 
their small tenants, who are obliged to attend when required 
to do the landlord's work, at rates of wages, in many instances, 
considerably under the current rates paid to ordinary labourers, 
and without regard to the inconvenience or loss to the tenant 

i 1. c. p. 25. s i # c# p . 25. 5 1. c. pp. 31, 32. 

1. c. p. 27. 4 1. c. p. 1. 6 1. c. p. 25. 



The G italist Accumulation 

of being obliged * I his own business at criticaJ peri 

twing or reaping 
The nnceitainty and irregularity of employment, th< I ^nt 
mi and long duratL of labour, all tl iptoms 

of a relative surplus-population, figure tli- •: in the re] 

ofthi P Law administrati many hardships of the 

icultural prol It will be remembered thai are i 

in the English agricultural 

the diffei thai in England, an industrial count 

■ •■ mi the country d 

whilst in irultural ••••uutry, tin- agricultural 

i If from the I the cii 

the expell :ulturaJ lal In the form per- 

nnm f agriculture are trail formed mi ny-op 

; in tli-- • I reed into the towns, whilst at the 

tame time they i n the in Ur main agricul- 

I laboui 

si-ardi "t 

The official am up 

1 'li li\ in t w ith tli ) 

lity, li !i w.i'j. pro- 

■■•..■ • . his 

and children I tmosphere of these cabin 

binc<l with tin 

iculai . tible I fever and pull 

umpti frond i thai 

inai f t In- in a sombi 

tea, tha» they l< 
■ 

Ires nj 
mil) 1 idea, to cmi 

poptilal in 

a happy lii 

On my reesn( 

! ' 



J3 2 Capitalist Production. 

" I met with the following evidence of effort in an Irish skilled 
workman to afford education to his children ; and I give his 
evidence verbatim, as I took it from his mouth. That he was 
a skilled factory hand, may be understood when I say that he 
was employed on goods for the Manchester market. ' Johnson. 
— I am a beetler and work from 6 in the morning till 11 at 
night, from Monday to Friday. Saturday we leave off at 6 
p.m., and get three hours of it (for meals and rest). I have 
five children in all. For this work I get 10s. 6d. a week ; my 
wife works here also, and gets 5s. a week. The oldest girl 
who is 12, minds the house. She is also cook, and all the ser- 
vant we have. She gets the young ones ready for school. A 
girl going past the house wakes me at half past five in the 
morning. My wife gets up and goes along with me. We get 
nothing (to eat) before we come to work. The child of 12 
takes care of the little children all the day, and we get 
nothing till breakfast at eight. At eight we go home. We 
get tea once a week ; at other times we get stirabout, some- 
times of oatmeal, sometimes of Indian meal, as we are able to 
get it. In the winter we get a little sugar and water to our 
Indian meal. In the summer we get a few potatoes, planting 
a small patch ourselves ; and when they are done we get back 
to stirabout. Sometimes we get a little milk as it may be. 
So we go on from day to day, Sunday and week day, always 
the same the year round. I am always very much tired when 
I have done at night. We may see a bit of flesh meat some- 
times, but very seldom. Three of our children attend school, 
for whom we pay Id. a week a head. Our rent is 9d a week. 
Peat for firing costs Is. 6cl. a fortnight at the very lowest." 1 
Such are Irish wages, such is Irish life ! 

In fact the misery of Ireland is again the topic of the day in 
England. At the end of 1866 and the beginning of 1867, one 
of the Irish land magnates, Lord Dufferin, set about its solu- 
tion in the "Times." " Wie menschlich von solchgrossem Herrn!" 

From Table E. we saw that, during 1864, of £4,368,610 of 
total profits, three surplus-value makers pocketed only 
£262,610; that in 1865, however, out of £4,669,979 total 

1 Kept, of Insp. of Fact. 31st Oct., 18GG, p. 90. 



The General Lazu of Capitalist Accumulation* 7 



profits, the .same three virtuosi of "al :ei I 

£27 t,448 ; in 1 B6 t, 26 ■.-■.•• 1 

£6 K) : >77 ! value m I to L7.*> ( 44S; 

in 1864, 121 surplus-value makei 61,066,912; in Lfi 

surplus-value makers, £1 in 1864, L131 

value maken £2,150,818, nearly half of the total annual 

profit; in 1865, 1194 surplus-value mak £2,418 

mora than half of the total annual profit Bat the li 

which an inc U nun [ land magnates in 

England, S >tland and Ireland swallow up of t 

national rental is - » monstrous thai the wisdom of tl Eli jlish 

think tit t<> afford tin- tistical materials 

about the distribution of >• I the distribution «>i 

Lord Dutierin is < -n-- « .i thu>e land magnat •>. That 
rent-rolli and profits can d their 

plethora is in any m I with plethora of the people's 

uf -■ .11!^.- an idea ss " disrepntable .n<l." 

i l • v 'I'll- : Irish population 

diminishes, the [risfa rent-rolli iwell thai depopulation 1 'no- 
landlords, th 1 benefits the soil, and 

1 aere acce fthosoiL kle declares, th 

land 1 still over-populat strean. 

emigrai y. T • I •■ c\ ly liapp) 1 re* 

land iif-thii i 1 >f a million «»t labouj 

men. I. m imagim this lord, poetic ini 1 

grado, w 1 
• ■ <li-l red phlabotomj 

again phlebotom I tin- the 

' me as his blood L I I • . ,: • • n mand.s a new U 
letti' ■ t a million onlj, inste abonJ I 

milli ■ of thoHe, the 

millennium in Ki in 



1 M 


1 i>'. ..» . r '• *• r»«. 


• 


ts, 

Ml ***»•*■ 


1 


mjm 


".'.•« ; 










a,or 



734 



Capitalist Production. 



(5) Farms over 30, 
not over 50 acres. 


(6) Farms ever 5C, 
not over IOC acres. 


(7) Farms ever 100 
acres. 


(8) Total area. 


!j No. 
I 

\ 71961 


Acres. 
2,906,274 


Nc. 

54,247 


Acres. 
S ; 9SS,SS0 


No. 

31,927 


Acres. 

8,227,807 


Acres. 
26,319,924 " 



Centralisation has from 1851 to 1861 destroyed principally 
farms of the first three categories, under 1 and not over 15 
acres. These above all must disappear. This gives 307,058 
" supernumerary : ' farmers, and reckoning the families the low 
average of 4 persons. 1,228,232 persons. On the extravagant 
supposition that, after the agricultural revolution is complete, 
one-fourth of these are again absorbable, there remain for emi- 
gration 921,174 persons. Categories 4, 5, 6, of over 15 and not 
over 100 acres, are, as was known long since in England, too 
small for capitalistic cultivation of corn, and for sheep-breeding 
are almost vanishing quantities. On the same supposition as 
before, therefore, there are further 788,761 persons to emigrate; 
total, 1,709,532. And as l'appetit vient en mangeant, Rent- 
roll's eyes will soon discover that Ireland, with 3| millions, is 
still always miserable, and miserable because she is over-popu- 
lated. Therefore her depopulation must go yet further, that 
thus she may fulfil her true destiny, that of an English sheep 
walk and cattle-pasture. 2 

3 The total area includes also peat, bogs, and waste land. 

* How the famine and its consequences have been deliberately made the most of, 
both by the individual landlords and by the English legislature, to forcibly carry out 
the agricultural revolution and to thin the population of Ireland down to tbe propor- 
tion satisfactory to the landlords, I shall show more fully in Vol III. of this work, 
in the section on landed property. There also I return to the condition of the small 
farmers and the agricultural labourers. At present, only one quotation. Nassau W. 
Senior says, with other things, in his posthumous work, " Journals, Conversations 
and Essays, relating to Ireland." 2 vols. London 1868; Vol. II., p. 282. "Well," 
said Dr. &.. " we have got our Poor Law and it is a great instrument for giving the 
victory to the landlords. Another, and a still more powerful instrument is emigra- 
tion . . . No friend to Ireland can wish the war to be prolonged [between the land- 
lords and the small Celtic farmers] — still less, that it should end by the victory of the 
tenants. The sooner it is over — the sooner Ireland becomes a grazing country, with 
the comparatively thin population which a grazing country requires, the better for 
all classes.''" The English Corn Laws of 1815 secured Ireland the monopoly of the free 
importation of corn into Great Britain. They favoured artifically, therefore, the 
cultivation of corn. With the abolition of the Corn Laws in 1840, this monopoly was 



The General Law of Capitalist A 

Like all in thi^ ba-1 world, thie pi 

dr&wh With the 

cumulation of the [fish in A \ 

hman, banished by od th< 

ride of the ocean at a Fenian, and face to face with the old >[•• 

of th< ••>, thi'-at' iiin_r an- 1 inuru threaten*!] 

giant Re] mbiic : 

A- B 

irudl.nly r- ■ ' ;.art from all i.tln-r circumstance*, this event alone wu fuffi- 

ci<nt t-j -i\. ,i great i::.;.' ;!■»< to the turning of Iriah .kr.il>!-- into pasture butd, to Ihi 

•malleoli atfuloeai 

of tip I id been praiaed from 1815 ko LMflt Mai proclaimed loudly ■ 

" : ii • « 1 (>>t I 

toover sud tat it u u rage. 31. 

f if****- de Lavergne lia* hastened to repeat ti It 

la Larergne, to be caught I 



PART VIII. 
THE SO-CALLED PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

THE SECRET OF PRIMITIVE ACCUMULATION. 

WE have seen how money is changed into capital ; how- 
through capital surplus-value is made, and from sur- 
plus-value more capital. But the accumulation of capital pre- 
supposes surplus-value ; surplus- value presupposes capitalistic 
production ; capitalistic production presupposes the pre-exist- 
ence of considerable masses of capital and of labour-power in 
the hands of producers of commodities. The whole movement, 
therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we 
can only get by supposing a primitive accumulation (previous 
accumulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumula- 
tion ; an accumulation not the result of the capitalist mode of 
production, but its starting point. 

This primitive accumulation plays in Political Economy 
about the same part as original sin in theology. Adam bit the 
apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human race. Its origin is 
supposed to be explained when it is told as an anecdote of the 
past. In times long gone by there were two sorts of people • 
one, the diligent, intelligent, and, above all, frugal elite ; the 
other, lazy rascals, spending their substance, and more, in 
riotous living. The legend of theological original sin tells us 
certainly how man came to be condemned to eat his bread in 
the sweat of his brow ; but the history of economic original sin 
reveals to us that there are people to whom this is by no means 



The Secret of Primitive Accumulation. 7 57 

- • J. \ \ • •]■ mind I Thi mar 

unmbiT l wealth, and the lat- 

ir own And from t! 

the !»"• f the great majority that, despite ail it- lal 

now nothii all but Itself, and the 

few thai increases constantly although they have long I 

to work. Sucli insipid childishness is day preached t<> 

u> in the defence of pi y. M. Thi /., liad th< 

I it with all the solemnity of I the 

ach people I ion as the qi 

of prop ap, it beoom 1 duty to proclaim the 

Intellectual food of the infant sj the one thing tit foralJ ages 
an<l for all In actual history i 

001 • ment, robbery, murder, bri 

>, play the great part In the tender anna) I P 
idyllic >m time immemorial. Right 

"labow from all time the sole m f enrichment^ the 

as a matter of I 
the methods of primitive accumulati anythii llic 

In "Ives inoii' y and COmmod m> m< 

than duction and of SUbd ' 

want t : L Bui 

• 

very different kind -possessors 

inn * conn 'in- I ) and, the 

h «.f ) l duction, means ol 
increase t n-> tin -y p«- 

people's labonr-pc n the otl 

the sellei I I 1 m labour-p and to 

tin* selh-i ir.in I i.elal> in the double sense 

that ncil I them of the means 

of pn 'hi' ' in tin- r do 

the 11 1 1 • lol 

an-, tl ■ i 

\\ th • 
lumhiuenfal « • i»< 1 1 - 

! <•.•ij.it. n T|»i' 

up|)oses the • labourers from 



7 38 Capitalist Production. 

property in the means by which they can realise their labour. 
As soon as capitalist production is once on its own legs, it not 
only maintains this separation, but reproduces it on a continu- 
aUy extending scale. The process, therefore, that clears the 
way for the capitalist system, can be none other than the 
process which takes away from the labourer the possession of 
his means of production ; a process that transforms, on the one 
hand, the social means of subsistence and of production into 
capital, on the other, the immediate producers into wage- 
labourers. The so-called primitive accumulation, therefore, is 
nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the pro- 
ducer from the means of production. It appears as primitive, 
because it forms the pre-historic stage of capital and of the 
mode of production corresponding with it. 

The economic structure of capitalistic society has grown out 
of the economic structure of feudal society. The dissolution of 
the latter set free the elements of the former. 

The immediate producer, the labourer, could only dispose of 
his own person after he had ceased to be attached to the soil 
and ceased to be the slave, serf, or bondman of another. To 
become a free seller of labour-power, who carries his commodity 
wherever he finds a market, he must further have escaped from 
the regime of the guilds, their rules for apprentices and journey- 
men, and the impediments of their labour regulations. Hence, 
the historical movement which changes the producers into 
wage-workers, appears, on the one hand, as their emancipation 
from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds, and this side 
alone exists for our bourgeois historians. But, on the other 
hand, these new freedmen became sellers of themselves only 
after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, 
and of all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal 
arrangements. And the history of this, their expropriation, is 
written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and fire. 

The industrial capitalists, these new potentates, had on their 
part not only to displace the guild masters of handicrafts, but 
also the feudal lords, the possessors of the sources of wealth. 
Tn this respect their conquest of social power appears as the 
fruit of a victorious struggle both against feudal lordship and 



The Secret of Primitive Accumulation. 

it revolting] unst the guilds and the I 

they laid on the free development of production and the 
exploitation of man by man. The chevaliers dlndustrie, fa 

r, only succeeded in supplanting the chevali 
by making use of event i of which they themselves were wholly 
innocent They hai n by means as wile as those by which 

the Roman freed-man once on ■ time made himself the mi 
of hi - patron 

The starting-point of the development thai I the 

wage-labourer as well as to the capitalist, was the servitud 
the lab The advan< change of form 

this ide, "m the transformation of feudal exploitation 

capital] loitation. To understand its march, we w 

go back far. Although uvr.inr a<T<>N.s tin- fir>t hc/mn 

of capitalist production the L 4th or L 5th century, 

sporadically, in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capi- 
talistic* from the 16th century. Wherever it app 
the abolition of erfdom has been Long effe< .1 the highest 
development of the middle ; rice of 
towns, h; 'i th.- * an 

In th< f primitive accumulation, all revolt 

ch-making ti I pitalist da>s in 

hut, ai»ove all, those moments win i 
; uMi'iily and forcibly torn from their m< 

, an-l hnrl.il ;i In-.- and " unattached *' | ' 

on the laboui nation nf th«- agricultural 

I t, fi mm tin- soil, i bole 

i The hi>t : i . ill 

assumes different aspect nd runs through i .u> j>i 

diil'i i. Mt • i ■ 1- : In 1 

which ani|'l- in 1 

1 lit Italy, whnv 

r tliftn i'ImvImh l wrf wm Mtta 
my |<r»« 

I .» fr«o | **ior 

I -Ait h»nlr.l do«| At lrgmctr* ' 
M twin-. 

u.ihIhIaI. -I Northern ItAly • oommrr- 

• ctioont in rn ma*t< 

the c re MOD , to the ptiiti cult* 

in tli 



74° Capitalist Prodtiction. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

EXPROPRIATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION FROM THE 

LAND. 

In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the last 
part of the 14th century. The immense majority of the 
population * consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 
15th century, of free peasant proprietors, whatever was the 
feudal title under which their right of property was hidden. 
In the larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a serf, 
was displaced by the free farmer. The wage-labourers of 
agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised their 
leisure time by working on the large estates, partly of an 
independent special class of wage-labourers, relatively and 
absolutely few in numbers. The latter also were practically 
at the same time peasant farmers, since, besides their wages, 
they had alloted to them arable land to the extent of 4 or more 
acres, together with their cottages. Besides they, with the 
rest of the peasants, enjoyed the usufruct of the common 
land, which gave pasture to their cattle, furnished them with 
timber, fire-wood, turf, &c. 2 In all countries of Europe, 

1 " The petty proprietors who cultivated their own fields with their own hands, and 
enjoyed a modest competence .... then formed a much more important part of the 
nation than at present. If we may trust the best statistical writers of that age, not 
less than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, must have made up more than 
a seventh of the whole population, derived their subsistence from little freehold 
estates. The average income of these small landlords .... was estimated at 
between £60 and £70 a year. It was computed that the number of persons who 
tilled their own land was greater than the number of those who farmed the land of 
others." Macauiay : History of England, 10th ed., 1854, I. p. 333,334. Even in 
the last third of the 17th century, |- of the English people were agricultural. (1. c, p. 
413.) I quote Macauiay, because as systematic falsifier of history he minimises as 
much as possible facts of this kind. 

2 We must never forget that even the serf was not only the owner, if but a tribute- 
paying owner, of the piece of land attached to his house, but also a co-possessor of 
the common land. " Le paysan y (in Silesia, under Frederick II.), est serf." Never- 
theless, these serfs possess common lands. " On n' a pas pu encore engager les Si- 
lesiens au partage des communes, tandis que dans la Nouvelle Marche, il n'y a guere 
de village ou ce partage ne soit execute avec le plus grand succes.' : (Mirabeau : 
De la Monarchic Prussienne. Londres, 1788, t. ii. , pp. 125, 126. ) 



Expropriatioii of / Xgricultural Population* 74 1 

feudal production is charad by division of th 

amongst the greatest possible number of sub-feud The 

might of the feudal Lord, like that of the 
not "ii the length of his i il, but on the number of his 

subj< :i«l the latter depended on the number of ; 
proprietors. 1 Although, therefore, the English land, after the 
Norman conqui b, ..• distributed in gigantic baronies, on 
which often included some 900 of the old Angl 9 >n Lord- 
ships, it was bestrewn with Bmall at pro] only here 
and there interspersed with great seignorial domains. Such 
gether with the prosperity of the towns so chai 
tic of the 1 5 th century, allowed of that wealth of the 
people which Chancellor Fori 10 eloquently paints in his 
' Laudee legum AjiglisB;" but it excluded the possibility of 
italistic bh. 

The prelu volution thai laid the foundation 

the capitalist mode of production, was played in the last third 
of the 1 5th, and the first decade of the L6th century. A n 
of free 1 was burled on the labour-market bj 

ipofthel f feudal retainers, who r James 

well rywhere uselessly filled house ami 

• le." A 11 hough the roj al Fa pro luci of ois 

lopment, in ife aft sibly 

I oil tl olution <»f tli.- band 

by 00 in. hi - the ol< of it In in nflict with 

nd parliament, tb ludal lords created an incom- 

Rbly large 1 proletariat bj the forcible <lri\i' the 

in the land, to which the latter ha<l tin 

feudal 1 b lord himself, and by the osurpal the 

common lan<l J aj>i<l 1 I ' • uiisli w ool mam, 

I : tli.- 1 in t lie 1 in 

1 t imp • 1 old 

nobilitj udal wai 

new nobility was the child oi ri hicfa 

1 .Ia|WIIi, 

^ivi'fl a much truer pt> 

I > tlx ••■ irgeul* j 



74 2 Capitalist Production. 

the power of all powers. Transformation of arable land into 
sheep-walks was, therefore, its cry. Harrison, in his "Descrip- 
tion of England, prefixed to Holinshed's Chronicle," describes 
how the expropriation of small peasants is ruining the country. 
" What care our great encroachers ? " The dwellings of the 
peasants and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the 
ground or doomed to decay. " If," says Harrison, " the old 
records of euerie manour be sought .... it will soon appear 
that in some manour seventeene, eighteene, or twentie houses 
are shrunk .... that England was neuer less furnished with 
people than at the present .... Of cities and townes either 
utterly decaied or more than a quarter or half diminished, 
though some one be a little increased here or there ; of townes 
pulled downe for sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships 
now standing in them .... I could saie somewhat." The 
complaints of these old chroniclers are always exaggerated, but 
they reflect faithfully the impression made on contemporaries 
by the revolution in the conditions of production. A com- 
parison of the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas 
More reveals the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. As 
Thornton rightly has it, the English working-class was pre- 
cipitated without any transition from its golden into its iron 
age. 

Legislation was terrified at this revolution. It did not yet 
stand on that height of civilisation where the " wealth of the 
nation " (i.e., the formation of capital, and the reckless exploita- 
tion and impoverishing of the mass of the people) figure as the 
ultima Thule of all state-craft. In his history of Henry VII. , 
Bacon saj^s : " Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more 
frequent, whereby arable land (which could not be manured 
without people and families) was turned into pasture, which 
was easily rid by a few herdsmen ; and tenancies for years, 
lives, and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived) 
were turned into demesnes. This bred a decay of people, and 
(by consequence) a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the 

like In remedying of this inconvenience the king's 

wisdom was admirable, and the parliament's at that time .... 
they took a course to take away depopulating inclosures, and 



JixproJ ric ult ura! P /:/ 1 I 

i I my VII., 14C 
19, forbad tl brud 

which at I ist20 i belonged I 8 5 1 1 

VIII., t : ,v fu renewed It recites, among ol 

thin it many farms and large flock 

i in the ban 
! has much risen and tillage fallen 

churches and houses have been palled down, and marvellous 

leprii ins wherewith 

in then ir famili- 

bnildii 
a proportion between corn land and pasture land, 

An t«-s th; • |ki-- 

the numl 
of t! Itl l "' ( ' yeai 

11 priation of tl 

: •■ alik- Tin- IT LneflB 

Bac<»n, without knowing reveals 

Kin [] | ! « . il ami Moral," 

Esea ' mi in 1 and admirable, In 

h-.ii bandrj otained with 

men i them as may in •••! a >u\ 

•i-l to k 
tin- plough in the hand ami m »t m- 

I homaa More «ay». that in KngUt 
■ to meke anil tarnc, nu<\ eo anal oaten, now.aa I hcare i 
• leroarera ami m> wyl icy rate up. ami ■ wallow .{••» vary HMO 

thcmaclfca." Q 

on ahowa the connexion bttww a free, 

I * in . !■ rfully conoern Ihe might ami n tanner ho- 
inm as it wor© of a «tan<lartl auAcioir 

^rrat |» 

I-eopla, of a OOOdittor 
Uemen, onil eotu. poMUiti !*th been h> 

opinion uf Mi of h« «t jM-U'iu. nt in tin- waft . . that lh» |-nmri|«l «ti. i.^th oi an 

n a kmi 
TbercfiT . if a «Utr run in 

AM'I jiluusl.inrn h« hut a* t>.< tr * •-' • > ' '»>-• ir«-r«. ><t « !•«• inr r | « • •••a^. r« | • hicli 
htfjara), you m> » good oa --I •table b — rl o 

rr |wM. 
I I. whrrr bleaa* u. 



744 Capitalist Production. 

What the capitalist system demanded was, on the other hand, 
a degraded and almost servile condition of the mass of the 
people, the transformation of them into mercenaries, and of 
their means of labour into capital. During this transformation 
period, legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by 
the cottage of the agricultural wage-labourer, and forbad him 
to take lodgers into his cottage. In the reign of James I., 1627, 
Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having built 
a cottage on the manor of Front Mill without 4 acres of land 
attached to the same in perpetuity. As late as Charles I.'s 
reign, 1638, a royal commission was appointed to enforce the 
carrying out of the old laws, especially that referring to the 4 
acres of land. Even in Cromwell's time, the building of a 
house within 4 miles of London was forbidden unless it was 
endowed with 4 acres of land. As late as the first half of the 
18th century complaint is made if the cottage of the agricul- 
tural labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of land. 
Nowadays he is lucky if it is furnished wdth a little garden, or if 
he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few roods. " Land- 
lords and farmers," says Dr. Hunter, u work here hand in hand. 
A few acres to the cottage would make the labourers too inde- 
pendent." 1 

The process of forcible expropriation of the people received 
in the 16th century a new and frightful impulse from the 
Reformation, and from the consequent colossal spoliation 
of the church property. The Catholic church was, at the 
time of the Reformation, feudal proprietor of a great part of 
the English land. The suppression of the monasteries, Szc. y 
hurled their inmates into the proletariat. The estates of 
the church were to a large extent given away to rapacious 
royal favourites, or sold at a nominal price to speculating 
farmers and citizens, who drove out, en masse, the hereditary 

inforced to employ mercenary bands of Switzers and the like, for their battalions of 
foot ; whereby also it comes to pass that those nations have much people and few- 
soldiers. " (" The Reign of Henry VII." Verbatim reprint from Kennet's England. 
Ed. 1719. Lond., 1870, p. 308.) 

1 Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 184. "The quantity of land assigned (in the old laws) 
would now be judged too great for labourers, and rather as likely to convert them 
into small farmers." (George Roberts: "The Social History of the People of the 
Southern Counties of England in past centuries." Lond., 1856, pp. 184-185.) 



I', prop)- ' ' cultural Pofiui 

sub-T ,'i<l threw their holdings bit 

guar: rty oftl folk in hurch's 

tithee •• Pauper nbi 

d Eliz and. In 

of her . the nation •• 

paupei i-iii officially by the introduction of a | 

authors of this law leem to 1. 

ground ! oontn I Qsage] it baa do \ 

amble vrhal By the 161 I I . ch. i. il 

d !. and in fact only in I kc a new 

and i mim-ili (nation 

The pi church 

■ i 
• oL n . 

- w 

thing* ""nth of Ki 

put t 

■ 
1'fOpO— d tlia' 

tlo give in waled propo 

• 

iint pOMWetag - '' t n. "i t relit t" Uk< .» farm or ihip, m. an to livi without labour, 

wlvaiiUtfcou* 
tor '» on 

V. 

•beta) will 

i 

ball Ih* « 
I i« hoy I, * 

the tnrau* «>f k'-« pui.; .! .»n \\t .-'., •< I" !'.'.'••> "Tin ||i«t<>i y >>f I'.'litt. .»! I :-r.» 

!! 

1 
I • 

: e rrpttbltem* 

■ 

id 1 . ii* 1041, eaj i oeereaee of 

era nl 

votch npuMteen on priaeiple, erre eal j 



74-6 Capitalist Production. 

formed the religious bulwark of the traditional conditions of 
landed property. With its fall these were no longer tenable. 1 

Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the yeomanry, 
the class of independent peasants, were more numerous than 
the class of farmers. They had formed the backbone of Crom- 
well's strength, and, even according to the confession of 
Macaulay, stood in favourable contrast to the drunken squires 
and to their servants, the country clergy, who had to marry their 
masters' cast-off mistresses. About 1750, the yeomanry had 
disappeared, 2 and so had, in the last decade of the 18th century, 
the last trace of the common land of the agricultural labourer. 
We leave on one side here the purely economic causes of the 
agricultural revolution. We deal only with the forcible means 
employed. 

After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed proprietors 
carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation, effected every- 
where on the Continent without any legal formality. They 
abolished the feudal tenure of land, i.e., they got rid of 
all its obligations to the State, " indemnified " the State by 
taxes on the peasantry and the rest of the mass of the people, 
vindicated for themselves the rights of modern private property 
in estates to which they had only a feudal title, and, finally, 
passed those laws of settlement, which, mutatis mutandis, had 
the same effect on the English agricultural labourer, as the 
edict of the Tartar Boris Godunof on the Russian peasantry. 

The " glorious Revolution " brought into power, along with 

not the abolition of villenage, but the abolition of the property of the agricultural 
labourer in the soil made him a proletarian, and eventually a pauper. In France, 
where the expropriation was effected in another way, the ordonnance of Moulins, 1571, 
and the Edict of 1656, correspond to the English poor-laws. 

1 Professor Rogers, although formerly Professor of Political Economy in the Uni- 
versity of Oxford, the hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in his preface to the " History 
of Agriculture " lays stress on the fact of the pauperisation of the mass of the people 
by the Reformation. 

2 A letter to Sir T. C. Banbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. By a 
Suffolk Gentleman. Ipswich, 1795, p. 4. Even the fanatical advocate of the system 
of large farms, the author of the " Inquiry into the connection of large farms, etc., 
London, 1773," p. 133, says : " I most lament the loss of our yeomanry, that set of 
men who really kept up the independence of this nation ; and sorry I am to see their 
lands now in the hands of monopolizing lords, tenanted out to small farmers, who 
hold their leases on such conditions as to be little better than vassals ready to attend 
a summons on every mischievous occasion." 



ExpTi /' rial ion of A ; ricultur \l 1 ' filiation. 

William of the landlord a Listappropriai 

■nrplus-yalueJ They inau Ithei ibypracti 

cale tl, ■ hefta that ! o hitfa 

manage 1 m ly. T! given i 

idiculo ate* 

All thifl happened without the Blight 
observation of Legal etiquette The cr urn lands thus fraudul- 
ently appropriated, \ r with t : arch 

in during the 
republican revolution, i^\-\w the y prin 

domain v \^\\ oligarchy. 1 Tl 

the op with the view, amos pio- 

raoting free trade in land. I riding the domain 

i the 1 :ii, and to increasin 

aupply of the free agricnltaraJ to hand. 

. land) was the 1 atural all;. 

the ' and 

<-t* tip- lai_'.- iii.-iim depending 

• lut i- 'I'll.- Krijli-h h wn ii 
'|iiit<- a^ u . as did tip 

1 in hand with their i lie allies, the 

pea> n the forcible I the 

Grown land hy. This happened since 1 

i \ I. 

1 iiiinunal ; 

dealt u ith wa an old 'I which 

•M'll how tla? 

Urf« grant 

jciico . . . I*'ly 

■ • . 

oliam tain, HumlerUiitl 

• urkw*. ) 
illegal Ahoiuitlon • > a*)* and pai 

* •caii.UI.mh i h«|.t. r tit Ki»,('.i«t. I *\ >\\ tgtjpnii ' « ■.:■■■ u " (f 

. 

I 

1 



74S Capitalist Production. 

forcible usurpation of this, generally accompanied by the turn- 
ing of arable into pasture land, begins at the end of the 15th 
and extends into the 16th century. But, at that time, the pro- 
cess was carried on by means of individual acts of violence 
against which legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought 
in vain. The advance made by the 18th century shows 
itself in this, that the law itself becomes now the instrument 
of the theft of the people's land, although the large farmers 
make use of their little independent methods as well. 1 The 
parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for enclosures 
of Commons, in other words, decrees by which the landlords 
grant themselves the people's land as private property, decrees 
of expropriation of the people. Sir F. M. Eden refutes his own 
crafty special pleading, in which he tries to represent com- 
munal property as the private property of the great landlords 
who have taken the place of the feudal lords, when he, him- 
self, demands a " general Act of Parliament for the enclosure of 
Commons," (admitting thereby that a parliamentary coup d'etat 
is necessary for its transformation into private property), and 
moreover calls on the legislature for the indemnification for the 
expropriated poor. 2 

Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by 
tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases, a servile rabble 
dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the systematic 
robbery of the Communal lands helped especially, next to 
the theft of the State domains, to swell those large farms, that 
were called in the 18th century capital farms 3 or mer- 
chant farms, 4 and to " set free " the agricultural population as 
proletarians for manufacturing industry. 

1 " The farmers forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides themselves and 
children, under the pretence that if they keep any beasts or poultry, they will steal 
from the farmers' barns for their support ; they also say, keep the cottages poor and 
you will keep them industrious, &c, but the real fact, I believe, is that the farmers 
may have the whole right of common to themselves." (A Political Inquiry into the 
consequences of enclosing Waste Lands. London, 1785, p. 75.) 

2 Eden, 1. c. preface. 

3 " Capital Farms. " Two letters on the Flour Trade end the Dearness of Corn. P>y 
a person in business. London, 17G7, pp. 19, 20. 

4 " Merchant Farms. " An Inquiry into the present High Prices of Provisions. 
London, 1767, p. 11. Note. — This excellent work, that was published anonymously,, 
is by the Rev. Nathaniel Forster. 



/:" l / i f> rial ion of „ igricultu 

■ fall j 

i " ' identity h I dth and the | 

Hence tl 

I that tiin-- on ' • i 
Prom the ma - of material t ; I I 

rive «l f< ill throw a li :h1 i >n I •■ 

cumetanoei of the time 

indignant | ! . ! I on the 

avei r«» I up in! '• 

" In N«.itli;i!u|)t ■ L ' I of 

; l 1 1 1 i. 
• in tin 

turned ini -•■. in o raeequenc y lordsl 

I I its pli j v, in u ni<-li L500 \ 

: • merly. The i oin m»-r <1w< ■ : . i h _t-)i ■ •> . 

An 
Imit'livd 1i-.ii-. •, jin.! f';iinili !<1 villages 

. dwindled to eight landb 

l onlj i W y--. 

i them in 
their op< n field ' 

wealth;. Iiidi 

wax in tl. | a> n 

■mallei 1 1 and propi \'i t : w n 

out of their livings with tl] lilies ai ilies 

who ! 

land I •■uhivated 

the 

m unity, that was aim. \ 1 I . landlords 

under |>n I liavr I 

I land It i ^ I 

v . r i t enclot 

t ■ i 

til-- i en beai - bai . 

•"•»• ^ v v •h«.fi »i|ilrraa iu ihe |mblk) on U»« roooo|>- 

r or 

I^«i».|..n, K7.'. |.j. .17. M 



750 Capitalist Projection. 

the poor, by depriving them of a part of their subsistence, and 
only goes towards increasing farms already too large. 1 " When," 
says Dr. Price, " this land gets into the hands of a few great 
farmers, the consequence must be that the little farmers " 
(earlier designated by him " a multitude of little proprietors 
and tenants, who maintain themselves and families by the 
produce of the ground they occupy by sheep kept on a common, 
by poultry, hogs, &c., and who therefore have little occasion to 
purchase any of the means of subsistence ") " will be converted 
into a body of men who earn their subsistence by working for 
others, and who will be under a necessity of going to market 
for all they want .... There will, perhaps, be more labour, 
because there will be more compulsion to it ... . Towns and 
manufacturers will increase, because more will be driven to 
them in quest of places and employment. This is the way in 
which the engrossing of farms naturally operates. And this is 
the way in which, for many years, it has been actually 
operating in this kingdom. 2 He sums up the effect of the 
enclosures thus: "Upon the whole, the circumstances of the 
lower ranks of men are altered in almost every respect for the 
worse. From little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the 
state of day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their 
subsistence in that state has become more difficult." 3 In fact, 

1 Dr. R. Price, 1. c, v. ii., p. 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and James 
Anderson, should be read and compared with the miserable prattle of Sycophant 
MacCulloch in his catalogue : The Literature of Political Economy, London, 1845. 

2 Price, 1. c, p. 147. 

3 Price, 1. c, p, 159. We are reminded of ancient Rome. "The rich had got posses- 
sion of the greater part of the undivided land. They trusted in the conditions of the 
time, that these possessions would not be again taken from them, and bought, there- 
fore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and belonging to the poor, with the 
acquiescence of their owners, and took some by force, so that they now were cultivat- 
ing widely extended domains, instead of isolated fields. Then they employed slaves 
in agriculture and cattle-breeding, because freemen would have been taken from 
labour for military service. The possession of slaves brought them great gain, 
inasmuch as these, on account of their immunity from military service, could freely 
multiply and have a multitude of children. Thus the powerful men drew all wealth 
to themselves, and all the land swarmed with slaves. The Italians, on the other 
hand, were always decreasing in number, destroyed as thsy were by poverty, taxes, 
and military service. Even when times of peace came, they were doomed to complete 
inactivity, because the rich were in possession of the soil, and used slaves instead of 
free men in the tilling of it." (Appian : Civil Wars, I. 7.) This passage refers to the 
time before the Licinian rogations. Military service, which hastened to so great an 



Expropiiatioii of Agricultural Population. 

usurpation of the oommoii lands and tl. icul- 

apanying this, told bo ely on the agriculti 

i 7 
their wi >w the minimum, and to be iup- 

plem Beial poor-law relief Their wages, h 

than enough f >r the absolute i I 

I. • as bear for a moment a defender of en Be and 

opponent of Dr. Pri Nor is il thai t 

must be depopulation, b men are not seen wa>tin_r then 

mr in th< d field .... It', by converting the i 
f .- 1 1 1 1 1 • rs int i ■ bo ly of men who must work for otl 
labour i i( is an advantage which the nation 

which, of ooui "corn do not belong "should 

wish for .... the produce beii n their joint 

:n, there will be a rarplu 
man and by this d inanumctu] the 

mines of th>- nation, will in< r- -a--, in prODOli thequantitv 

of oorn produ 
Th al peace of mind with which the political 

regarls the n iti«»n of the "sacred right 

ami tl. i \ i< >l< 

i lay t : F1 capitali 

mode of pro lud m n bj M E l< n. philanth 

bole * outrages, i 

• iiat accnmpai rcible d o\ 

tli- from the la t I bird of the l W h to the end 

I Bth cent ury, lead him m< 

• due eon ars 

whole of the i ith and the gn 



r.iught ttMfl 4n»fonnalion of frM Owimi 

|NMMMIiit« < an. I boodfHMO. 

n t li«4r ovitafM i 

tli»n ft Iftf i obUlfir u i* a 

ImAam. IMS, 1 i » 



752 Capitalist Production. 

3, and even 4 of arable land. About the middle of the 16th 
century the proportion was changed to 2 acres of pasture to 2, 
later on, of 2 acres of pasture to one of arable, until at last the 
just proportion of 3 acres of pasture to one of arable land was 
attained." 

In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion 
between the agricultural labourer and the communal property 
had, of course, vanished. To say nothing of more recent times, 
have the agricultural population received a farthing of com- 
pensation for the 3,511,770 acres of common land which between 
j 801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by parliamentary 
devices presented to the landlords by the landlords ? 

The last process of wholesale expropriation of the agricul- 
tural population from the soil is, finally, the so-called clearing 
of estates, i.e., the sweeping men off them. All the English 
methods hitherto considered culminated in "clearing." As 
we saw in the picture of modern conditions given in a former 
chapter, where there are no more independent peasants to get 
rid of, the " clearing " of cottages begins ; so that the agricul- 
tural labourers do not find on the soil cultivated by them even 
the spot necessary for their own housing. But what " clearing 
of estates " really and properly signifies, we learn only in the 
promised land of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland. 
There the process is distinguished by its systematic character, 
by the magnitude of the scale on which it is carried out at one 
blow (in Ireland landlords have gone to the length of sweeping 
away several villages at once ; in Scotland areas as large as 
German principalities are dealt with), finally by the peculiar 
form of property, under which the embezzled lands were 
held. 

The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which 
was the owner of the land on which it was settled. The 
representative of the clan, its chief or "great man," was only 
the titular owner of this property, just as the Queen of England 
is the titular owner of all the national soil. When the English 
government succeeded in suppressing the intestine wars of 
these u great men," and their constant incursions into the 
Lowland plains, the chiefs of the clans by no means gave up 



Expropriation oj cultural Papulation. 



/ o J 



their time-boi 1 its 

form, On tb n authority they transform .inal 

x into a right of prii this bronghl 

.a into collision with their clansmen] 
oat by -J-- n I A. king 

iya 1': 
revolution, which bejjan in 3 tland afl 
ie follows . ed through its 

• phases in the w ones 

And la the l 8th cental^ it ( 

forbi Iden to en >m th< with a view I i 

driving them by force to Qlssgow and other d 

sample of the metfa 1 9th 

ing ' made by the Duel \ Suth< rland 

1 I. c, p. 132. 

•. *ay« : " If you comp | f Un-ao lftl HfOMOWlj IncJ 

* economic catcg th the 

' . il a|>|M-nm v< ry iimall. If J r.unil«« r* 'arm, 

rfl] tin I thai an catat«> in ' time* a* I 

f the tame value in a go 

a Jtmo* of National 

I 

by fore HMMJi un«lcr falac 

pretence*. Home fled t" 

• 
•"I ->f s« • »y» lluchanan, th« * 

r t< -I . 
• .jarl t«» th- hrn -litary t' 
• 

I ■ mprre.il with ■ma 

■ ■ 
i (>enae : a .«. •!«•»• han<U being, v» ore* I, th 

mainta. 
* J i*I —*-••- ••• I > • n ir.te either eeck a • • in • . • • .„ ; ; . -• u m* t..*n«. ' A. l»a> . i 

Huch beanaUom oo, I \ 

.lira a* tl 

A 
II 

UOd nf 111 

:ia. pn-i 

I 
oountry ifatnat tic 



754 Capitalist Production. 

will suffice here. This person, well instructed in economy, 
resolved, on entering upon her government, to effect a radical 
cure, and to turn the whole country, whose population had 
already been, by earlier processes of the like kind, reduced to 
15,000, into a sheep-walk. From 1814 to 1820 these 15,000 
inhabitants, about 3000 families, were systematically hunted 
and rooted out. All their villages were destroyed and burnt, 
all their fields turned into pasturage. British soldiers en- 
forced this eviction, and came to blows with the inhabi- 
tants. One old woman was burnt to death in the flames of 
the hut, which she refused to leave. Thus this fine lady 
appropriated 794,000 acres of land that had from time im- 
memorial belonged to the clan. She assigned to the expelled 
inhabitants about 6000 acres on the sea-shore — 2 acres per 
family. The 6000 acres had until this time lain waste, and 
brought in no income to their owners. The Duchess, in the 
nobility of her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an 
average rent of 2s. 6d. per acre to the clansmen, who for 
centuries had shed their blood for her family. The whole of 
the stolen clan-land she divided into 29 great sheep farms, each 
inhabited by a single family, for the most part imported 
English farm-servants. In the year 1835 the 15,000 Gaels 
were already replaced by 131,000 sheep. The remnant of the 
aborigines flung on the sea-shore, tried to live by catching fish. 
They became amphibious and lived, as an English author 
says, half on land and half on water, and withal only half on 
both, 1 

But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their 
idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the " great men " 
of the clan. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of the 
great men. They scented some profit in it, and let the sea- 

' When the presentDuchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. Beecher Stowe, authoress 
of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with great magnificence in London, to show her sympathy 
for the negro slaves of the American republic — a sympathy that she prudently forgot, 
with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civil war, in which every " noble " English 
heart beat for the slave-owner — I gave in the "New York Tribune " the facts about 
the Sutherland slaves. (Epitomised in part by Carey in The Slave Trade. London, 
1853, p. 202, 203.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and led to a 
pretty polemic between the latter and the sycophants of the Sutherland. 



Exp rop riatio n of AgTU U It u n 7 1 Pop u la //< i ;/ . 

sfa to the great fishmongers of London. For thi nd 

time the Gaeli were banted «>ut. 1 

Bat, finally, part of the sheep-walks arc turned int'i •! 
preserve! Every one ' thai there are no real I 

in England The deer in the parka of tl ly 

don* • Loi Ion aldermen. 

fore tli'- I- • tin- • nuMe |.a^i->n." " In the Hi'h- 

landi in 1848, ' new fon I are springing op 

iik-- rnu hr mi t f **n i»n one sic] 

f< nd tli- • t be 

new f"f Ardverikie. In the saint- line yon bai 

I -k Mount, an inr • •! I 

m tli-- neighbourhood of \ 
Oban -yon have now ■ oontinnoae line of fared 
while in he I [ighlands thi 

of Loch Lrchaig, <J! i nmoriston, &c. Sheep w< 

introduced into glens whieh 1 1 r i < 1 L-.-n tl nnmnit 

n.ill farm nd the latter were driven to seek snb- 

eoarser and moi Now d< 

npplantin^ si ami tli ii^posResn 

tip- mall tenants, wh<» will n< v !••• ilrivni <l<>wn ii] 

rinding penury I i 
and the people oanno( ( ' or of I 

yield Let ( increased in numl 

daring the n«-xt >\ , try, n^ they 1 --n in • 

U I . This 

n. 1 1 1 1 1 1 land propri i i with soma a 

ii, i with some lot 

while f a more i tli<- trade In dV 

with i mountain 

range laid out in fm • \ m- ■ 

tl. i hen 1- 1 as I 

t«rwiiajc U »* foanrf 

I ■ • • ,,.:., SamHI 

lOTBM "lb* p COO M il 

- 

I no! a «4nfU Uw Th< '««, 

• ml ttirn ihr ,|. Mfctd In UmIIh 

n».^r |>Unting ami r«* 



756 Capitalist Production. 

huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits his offers by no other 
calculation than the extent of his purse. . . . Sufferings 
have been inflicted in the Higlands scarcely less severe than 
those occasioned by the policy of the Norman kings. Deer 
have received extended ranges, while men have been hunted 
within a narrower and still narrower circle. . . . One 
after one the liberties of the people have been cloven down. 
. . . And the oppressions are daily on the increase. . . . 
The clearance and dispersion of the people is pursued by the 
proprietors as a settled principle, as an agricultural necessity, 
just as trees and brushwood are cleared from the wastes of 
America or Australia ; and the operation goes on in a quiet, 
business-like way, &C." 1 

1 Robert Somers : Letters from the Highlands : or the Famine of 1847. London 
1848, pp. 12-28 passim. These letters originally appearedinthe "Times." The Eng- 
lish economists of course explained the famine of the Gaels in 1847, by their over- 
population. At all events, they "were pressing on their food-supply." The 
" clearing of estates," or as it is called in Germany " Bauernlegen," occurred in 
Germany especially after the 30 years' war, and led to peasant-revolts as late as 171 
in Kursachsen. It obtained especially in East Germany. In most of the Prussian 
provinces, Frederick II. for the first time secured right of property for the peasants. 
After the conquest of Silesia he forced the landlords to rebuild the huts, barns, etc., 
and to provide the peasants with cattle and implements. He wanted soldiers for his 
army and tax-payers for his treasury. For the rest, the pleasant life that the pea- 
sant led under Frederick's system of finance and hodge-podge rule of despotism, 
bureaucracy and feudalism, may be seen from the following quotation from his ad- 
mirer, Mirabeau : " Le lin fait done une des grandes richesses du cultivateur dans le 
Nord de l'Allemagne. Malheureusement pour l'espece humaine, ce n'est qu'une res- 
source contrela misere et non un moyen debien-etre. Les impots directs, les corvees, 
les servitudes de tout genre, ecrasent le cultivateur allemand, qui paie encore des 
impots indirects dans tout ce qu'il achete. . . . et pour comble de ruine, il n'ose pas 
vendre ses productions ou et commeil le veut ; il n'ose pas acheter ce dont il a besoin 
aux marchands qui pourraient le lui livrer au meilleur prix. Toutes ces causes le 
ruinent insensiblement, et il se trouverait hors d'etat de payer les impots directs a 
l'echeance sans la filerie ; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant utilement sa femme, 
ses enfants, ses servants, ses valets, et lui-meme ; mais quelle penible vie, meme 
aidee de ce secours. En ete, il travaille comme un forcat au labourage et a la recolte ; 
il se couche a 9 heures et se leve a deux, pour suffire aux travaux ; en hiver il devrait 
reparer ses forces par un plus grand repos ; mais il manquera de grains pour le pain 
et les semailles, s'il se defait des denrees qu'il faudrait vendre pour payer les impots. 
II faut done filer pour suppleer a ce vide. . . . il faut y apporter la plus grande 
assiduite. Aussi le paysan se couche-t-il en hiver a minuit, une heure, et se leve a 
cinq ou six ; ou bien il se couche a neuf, et se leve a deux, et cela tous les jours de la 
vie si ce n'est le dimanche. Ces exces de veille et de travail usent la nature humaine, 
et de la vient qu' hommes et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutot dans les campagnes 
que dans les villes. (Mirabeau, 1. c. t. III., pp. 212 sqq.) 

Note to the second edition. In April 18GG, 18 years after the publication of the work 



Expropriation of Agricultural P pulation 



/ 0/ 



The spoliation of the 
ation of t! : mains, the i 

the u-ii. Ian pr and i ; I ma- 

. i ii r i ] i prival r circtu 

ejus! ;y idyllic methods of primitive 

accumulation. They conquered the fi< I 
culture, ma \i- the soil pari and parcel of capital, and < 

town in«l i ■wiry Mipj'l^ 

lawed pi it 

So mem Leone] gave alt 

of Ail 
the tdvaa 

ihaap-wi 

. . A <l et of a ^ 

■mom a common change in the Highlan > I 

i the new t« : 
ajta ami the f«atli' r<-'l hinln. . . I I I 

fJalhooaia** estates in Forfarshii 
... In many of t 1j •-••• 
weasel ami th- 

i ' much ol 

winch |i i|.-,crii». 1 m the atat: ing a |M-!urage in 

mi of MM in a S 

on ti. 
I I 

i 

at.l wa- 
am ••>■.»■ ••' th' . -• f 'tie lands of 8 tUml Tlie natural grass of < .' i. lit wm 
among the nv»«t i la tin . \ 

w*ji liy fa | beat grazing ground in the wi«l< iicm.li; a |«tt 

)m at |»tt 

S.irn*- i'l.-a of the grooad Ui'l a tsU foi j .•• !> •• •■■rtm.c Mjupaasj in Si atiaad ii. aj be 
I 

Lnm ■retained 

rp. ami a« tt «•• 
iK.t m.r. than ..i.i > ihirtn th | ai*. of tl.. old f «•» • ■ t gTOttad in > '■ . I it i i. : 

i I 
w.\l- rt ..f tho (icrmanOora 
m or deeerte ot , -he decided interference d 



753 Capitalist Production. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

BLOODY LEGISLATION AGAINST THE EXPROPRIATED, FROM THE 
END OF THE lOTH CENTURY. FORCING DOWN OF WAGES 
BY ACTS OF PARLIAMENT. 

The proletariat created by tbe breaking up of the bands of 
feudal retainers and by the forcible expropriation of the people 
from the soil, this " free " proletariat could not possibly be 
absorbed by the nascent manufactures as fast as it was thrown 
upon the world. On the other hand, these men, suddenly 
dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not as suddenly 
adapt themselves to the discipline of their new condition. 
They were turned en masse into beggars, robbers, vaga- 
bonds, partly from inclination, in most cases from stress of cir- 
cumstances. Hence at the end of the 15th and during the 
whole of the 16th century, throughout Western Europe a bloody 
legislation against vagabondage. The fathers of the present 
working-class were chastised for their enforced transforma- 
tion into vagabonds and paupers. Legislation treated them 
as "voluntary" criminals, and assumed that it depended on their 
own goodwill to go on working under the old conditions that 
no longer existed. 

In England this legislation began under Henry VII. 

Henry VIII. 1530 : Beggars old and unable to work receive 
a beggar's licence. On the other hand, whipping and imprison- 
ment for sturdy vagabonds. They are to be tied to the cart- 
tail and whipped until the blood streams from their bodies, 
then to swear an oath to go back to their birthplace or to 
where they have lived the last three years and to " put them- 
selves to labour." What grim irony ! In 27 Henry VIII. 
the former statute is repeated, but strengthened with new 
clauses. For the second arrest for vagabondage the whipping 
is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off ; but for the third 
relapse the offender is to be executed as a hardened criminal 
and enemy of the common weal. 

Edward VI. : A statute of the first year of his reign, 1547, 



r.rgislatioji against the Expropriated. 759 

ordains that if anyone to work. 

as a slave to the poison who has denonnoed him as an idler. 
The in lave on bread and water, weak broth 

and each refu be thinks tit. Be baa the right 

bim to do any work, no matter how di with whip 

and chaina If tin- at a fortnight, he is condetni 

rery for life and is t<> be branded on I 1 or hark 

vritfa the letter S ; if he runs away thrice, he Lb to b 

1 -11 him, bequeath him, let him out 
onhu * slave, ju any other personal chattel oi 
If tl . are 

Jo it icei of I . on informati 

t 1 hunt the rascals down, [fit happens that ■ ■ nd has 

d idling about fori to his bu 

place, I 1 with ■ redhot iron with the letfc r V on the 

rk, in chains, in th >me 

r labour. If th< I Ise birthplace, h 

then • f this place, of its inhabitants, 

or i f aded with 

. the chil 
and to keep them asap] th men until t 

til the 20th. If th- y ran 1 
become np to this age the slaves ofthoir m 
them u whip them, I 

pot an 1: 'ii 1 ind th< ■• 

vrhicfa 1 '•■ him f him.' 

■ 

may be l n 

them ' nd drink find them work I h 

<»f 1 laves was k«'i»t up 11 I 1 until far into tl 1 

indanM • 

!<>gged and l • • u mil. * 

K>m< .'in int • • 1 \ 

•'.• Kmajt an Tr»l fign «•' I Vl 

Uldwd Um Km 

• .Ull U l»r». 



760 Capitalist Production. 

repetition of the offence, if they are over 18, they are to be 
executed, unless some one will take them into service for two 
years ; but for the third offence they are to be executed without 
mercy as felons. Similar statutes : 18 Elizabeth, c. 13, and 
another of 1597. 

James I : Any one wandering about and begging is declared 
a rogue and a vagabond. Justices of the peace in petty sessions 
are authorised to have them publicly whipped and for the first 
offence to imprison them for 6 months, for the second for 2 
years. Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and 
as often as the justices of the peace think fit . . . Incorrigible 
and dangerous rogues are to be branded with an E, on the left 
shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught begging 
again, to be executed without mercy. These statutes, legally 
binding until the beginning of the 18th century, were only re- 
pealed by 12 Ann, c. 23. 

1 Thomas More says in his Utopia : " Therefore that on covetous and tmsatiable 
cormaraunte and very plage of his native contrey maye compasse aboute and inclose 
many thousand akers of grounde together within one pale or hedge, the husbandmen 
be thrust owte of their owne, or els either by coneyne and fraude, or by violent op- 
pression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs and iniuries thei be so weried that they 
be compelled to sell all : by one meanes, therfore, or by other, either by hooke or 
crooke they muste needes departe awaye, poore, selye, wretched soules, men, women, 
husbands, wiues, fatherlesse children, widowes, wofull mothers with their yonge 
babes, and their whole household smal in substance, and muche in numbre, as hus- 
bandrye requireth many handes. Awaye thei trudge, I say, owte of their knowen 
accustomed houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. All their housholde stuffe, which 
is very little woorthe, thoughe it might well abide the sale : yet beeynge sodainely 
thruste owte, they be constrayned to sell it for a thing of nought. And when they 
haue wandered abrcde tyll that be spent, what can they then els doe but steale, and then 
iustly pardy be hanged, or els go about beggyng. And yet then also they be caste in 
prison as vagaboundes, because they go aboute and worke not : whom no man wyl set 
a worke though thei neuer so willy ngly prof re themselues therto." Of these poor 
fugitives of whom Thomas More says that they were forced to thieve, ' ' 7200 great and 
petty thieves were put to death," in the reign of Henry VIII. (Hollinshed, descrip- 
tion of England, Vol. 1. , p. 186. ) In Elizabeth's time, " rogues were trussed up apace, 
and that there was not one year commonly wherein three or four hundred were not 
devoured and eaten up by the gallowes." (Strype's Annals of the Reformation 
and Establishment of Religion, and other Various Occurrences in the Church of Eng- 
land during Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign. Second erl., 1725, Vol. 2.) According 
to this same Strype, in Somersetshire, in one year, 40 persons were executed, 35 rob- 
bers burnt in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 discharged as "incorrigible vagabonds." 
Nevertheless, he is of opinion that this large number of prisoners does not comprise even 
a fifth of the actual criminals, thanks to the negligence of the justices and the foolish 
compassion of the people ; and the other counties of England were not better off in 
this respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse. 



I . : latiuti against the Expropriat 

Similar ' ] where bj the mid the 17 

Y a kin was e I 

in Paria Even .it the beginning i Louie W! Ordi- 

nal.* • .' . ■. L3ih, 1777 i very man u I health fin d 

if without means •• an-1 

Of tl. 

n;tt- • ( IT. for the N 

1 1 • : 1 537 ' be I ' ■ ■ - and Town 

Holland [March 10, L61 k), "1 

Pi . Jon 26, LI ; ■ c. 

Tb iltural | 

from til-- noil, drn m their bomi * Lined int > - >nds, 

; m « I then whipped, brand^l, t< >rt 1 1 1 • - 1 \>y I 

ible, into the disciplim m. 

It u tliat the c >ndil 

1 m i man, in the aha] apital, at the one ; 

1 masses 
bai il l-iit their Labour-power. V itb 

enougb t! compelled I U it ?olc 

• a • 

irbicb I upon the condition! 

• ;'»n as 

f ' • •** (»: illy 

break down I 

. <.f lal s, in a rut ' 

>nda with tli '1 be "lull compul 

• •-•in: il nf tli 

I > i : • • 
W itill Intl. 

r mi ol t lit: can be i 

'"■■I ii tuity 1 . 

I ■ a iae <lurii 

1 usee the \ tut** to ■ regulate wages. 

aloe 



762 Capitalist Production. 

himself in the normal degree of dependence. This is an essen- 
tial element of the so-called primitive accumulation. 

The class of wage- labourers, which arose in the latter half of 
the 14th century, formed then and in the following century 
only a very small part of the population, well protected in its 
position by the independent peasant proprietary in the country 
and the guild-organization in the town. In country and town 
master and workmen stood close together socially. The subor- 
dination of labour to capital was only formal — i.e., the mode 
of production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic 
character. Variable capital preponderated greatly over con- 
stant. The demand for wage- labour grew, therefore, rapidly 
with every accumulation of capital, whilst the supply of wage- 
labour followed but slowly. A large part of the national pro- 
duct, changed later into a fund of capitalist accumulation, then 
still entered into the consumption fund of the labourer. 

Legislation on wage-labour, (from the first, aimed at the ex- 
ploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced, always equally 
hostile to him), 1 is started in England by the Statute of 
Labourers, of Edward III., 1349. The ordinance of 1350 in 
France, issued in the name of King John, corresponds with it. 
English and French legislation run parallel and are identical 
in purport. So far as the labour-statutes aim at compulsory 
extension of the working- day, I do not return to them, as this 
point was treated earlier (Chap. X., Section 5). 

The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent instance 
of the House of Commons. A Tory says naively : " Formerly 
the poor demanded such high wages as to threaten industry 
and wealth. Next, their wages are so low as to threaten in- 
dustry and wealth equally and perhaps more, but in another 
way." 2 A tariff of wages was fixed by law for town and country, 
for piece-work and day-work. The agricultural labourers were 
to hire themselves out by the year, the town ones " in open 

1 " Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences between masters 
and their workmen, its counsellors are always the masters," says A. Smith. " L'espdt 
des lois, c'est la propriety, " says linguet. 

2 "Sophisms of Free Trade." By a Barrister. Lond., 1850, p. 53. He adds 
maliciously: "We were ready enough to interfere for the employer, can nothing 
now be done for the employed ? " 



L fis/aium ug priattd. ; | 

market It wa.i forbidden, under pain of imprisonment, to 

_;••.-> than thu.v t i x » - « 1 by the itatate, bot th<- tsJcinj 
.•I v.. .... in- y j-uiii-lj.-.l than I 

m. [So & 1 19 of tl 

App | Bliza : :.. ti n -ii\ * impl 

bim that [»ay.s th-- lii^li' i w 

li mi that in. J A *tat ut»' • ■ :' I 

. • 

legal rate «>i w J punishment All 

contracts, • . by w Inch masons 

cally bound them 1 null I ition 

I Ith 
laws aga 

I 'n. if) :' I . 

and ' y in tl I I 

. it mi. 

In the 1 •■• :. 

much ••, bal 

in proportion I n«l- 

1 1 1 1 1 1 « m 1 i i in 

, <h«\\ ii 

e " wfc i 

'» 1 • ' :. • • ices of 

pesos w. i- • - : 1 1 1 • ■ ■ w . rod to fix certain wages anl t.. m . .lii\ them 
i • 1 iii^ I 

I • i thf • 

•piin • II 

ccfUin cl<-tl. took 

|.» la OorvM i after • 

■ 

iMih if ' I Uh»illi 

bMOM Wtlllll, • »■ i i' tl». j »« r. < m|l..yr.| »t •!.» ..ti.. t • rk. • '. »• • ».i.f **«-.'• 

" |>«*a«iiU *-. 
»|U|(m »n I — I ' 1 ISSSNH 

'urn po4«itUi«a * biitft cry |imi u|> *o"> »r»U *f*iu •!■ 
i.»jh -rlmci.i i* .. It. aI otll ftol RMMMtU .t»«:f to IU l.*i I I t - l U •».'. . 



764 Capitalist Production. 

extended the laws against coalitions of labourers to manufac- 
tures. In the manufacturing period par excellence, the capi- 
talist mode of production had become sufficiently strong to render 
legal regulation of wages as impracticable as it was unneces- 
sary ; but the ruling classes were unwilling in case of necessity 
to be without the weapons of the old arsenal. Still, 8 George 
II. forbade a higher day's wage than 2s. 7jd. for journeymen 
tailors in and around London, except in cases of general 
mourning; still, 13 George III., c. 68, gave the regulation of 
the wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace ; still, 
in 1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to de- 
cide, whether the mandates of justices of the peace as to wages 
held good also for non-agricultural labourers; still, in 1799, an 
act of Parliament ordered that the wages of the Scotch miners 
should continue to be regulated by a statute of Elizabeth and 
two Scotch acts of 1661 and 1671. How completely in the 
meantime circumstances had changed, is proved by an occur- 
rence unheard-of before in the English Lower House. In that 
place, where for more than 400 years laws had been made for 
the maximum, be} T ond which wages absolutely must not rise, 
AVhitbread in 1796 proposed a legal minimum wage for agri- 
cultural labourers. Pitt opposed this, but confessed that the 
" condition of the poor was cruel." Finally, in 1813, the laws 
for the regulation of wages were repealed. They were an 
absurd anomaly, since the capitalist regulated his factory by 
his private legislation, and could by the poor-rates make up 
the wage of the agricultural labourer to the indispensable 
minimum. The provisions of the labour statutes as to con- 
tracts between master and workman, as to giving notice and 
the like, which only allow of a civil action against the contract- 
breaking master, but on the contrary permit a criminal action 
against the contract-breaking workman, are to this hour (1873) 
in full force. The barbarous laws against Trades' Unions fell in 

with the legal wage ; the individual landed proprietors are forbidden to pay more 
than the State had fixed by a tariff. And yet the conditions of service were at times 
better after the war than 100 years later; the farm servants of Silesia had, in 1652, 
meat twice a week, whilst even in our century, districts are known where they have 
it only three times a year. Further, wages after the war were higher than in the 
following century." (G. Freitag.) 



Legislation against the Expropriated. J j 

; 25 before the threatening bearing of the 1 »• 

this, they fell only in pari Certain beautiful fragment* 
the old statute vanished only in l v L* Finally, Par- 

liament ol Jun - ' l s 71, made a pre! 
1 1 aces of this els lation 

Union But an act of Parliament of the sam< 
ttd the criminal law relating to \ 

blished, in point of fact, the former st I 
things in s new iha] ■ I • thi Parliament motage the 

as \\ hich tlr o old n e in ■ - r i ike i r I »ck-out 

withdrawn from the lawsoomm -ill cil 

• 1 under exceptional penal legislation, tl 
. bich fell to the mastei a in their capi 

;u !i'-f, ■ II I 

and tl me Mr Glad in the well-known 

liion brought in a Mil for tin I ion of 

all exceptional penal legislation against tl»«* wnrkh I 

I m •• 1 • 1 the see >nd reading; 

I until at 
an alii I round turn 

rried it into ] 
Not with thi I reat 1 

allow.-. 1 the 1 ixunplaisani in I I 

tin- ruling r\ laws aga 

spply them i 

■1 iimlfi tli-- j >i • - w i . nt tin- 
rs ill.) • I I ' i lianient jive tip the la* i sgs 

Ices and I ' as, after it had it- it. 1 1 \ • .; , 

li.-lil, NS :• leN 

1 I 

I taring tl • the 1 

o awn 

i 11 . I 

H tin. i with 



7 66 Capitalist Production. 

compulsion, confined the struggle between capital and labour 
within limits comfortable for capital, has outlived revolutions 
and changes of dynasties. Even the Reign of Terror left it un- 
touched. It was but quite recently struck out of the Penal Code. 
Nothing is more characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois 
coup d'e'tat. " Granting," says Chapelier, the reporter of the 
Select Committee on this law, " that wages ought to be a little 
higher than they are, . . . that they ought to be high enough 
for him that receives them, to be free from that state of abso- 
lute dependence due to the want of the necessaries of life, and 
which is almost that of slavery," yet the workers must not 
be allowed to come to any understanding about their own in- 
terests, nor to act in common and thereby lessen their " abso- 
lute dependence, which is almost that of slavery ; " because, 
forsooth, in doing this they injure " the freedom of their ci- 
devant masters, the present entrepreneurs," and because a 
coalition against the despotism of the quondam masters of the 
corporations is — guess what ! — is a restoration of the corpora- 
tions abolished by the French constitution. 1 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

GENESIS OF THE CAPITALIST FARMER. 

Now that we have considered the forcible creation of a class of 
outlawed proletarians, the bloody discipline that turned them 
into wage-labourers, the disgraceful action of the state which 
employed the police to accelerate the accumulation of capital 

du meme etat et profession etant Tune des bases fondamentales de la constitution 
franeaise, il est defendu de les retablir de fait sous quelque pretexte et sous quelque 
forme que ce soit." Article IV. declares, that if " des citoyens attaches aux memes 
professions, arts et metiers prenaient des deliberations, faisaient entre eux des con- 
ventions tendantes a refuser de concert ou a n'accorder qu'a un prix determine le 
secours de leur industrie ou de leurs travaux, les dites deliberations et conventions 
. . . seront declarees inconstitutionnelles, attentatoires a la liberte et a la declara- 
tion des droits de l'homme, &c. " : felony, therefore, as in the old labour- statutes. 
(" Revolutions de Paris." Paris, 1791, t. III., p. 523.) 

1 Buchez et Roux : " Histoire Parlementaire," t. x., p. 195. 



Genesis of tlie Capitalist 1 r. 

nee of ' n of labour, th< 

ins: whence came the capil Jlyl 1 

ipriatioti of th<- agricultural population <T«.*ateB, 

•1 j»r<>: A yer, 

• be fai i 
it i> t slow process Bvolvin 
buries. Tt i well is ti sail proprieb rs,n 

land d ry difl nurse, an<l 

• •ina: 1 on . I :. 

.ui'l tl himself ■ 

: j 1 1 Itr to thai old Roman i 

only in ■ in >re limil I hiring • 

l kii cent m bom the 

llord pi with seed, cattle and implements. Ii 

dition i^ not • I of the peasant. Only he 

expl age-laboor. r, a 

half I ! . . . 

the rhe vide the total | rodu< I 

i tn quickly <lisap- 

pearH in I 1, t-» give place to the 1 who 

;»ital breed by emp _j«--lul» 

i a part of the sorpl rt, in moot tin* 

:i<»ni n luring ( •• i *»th century! ai 

lent pea i m-lal 

ly m« 

need iri • 

• ■ I 

1 1 » • - 

I common Inn. Is allowed bin 

. ahno 
I mure I 

i i m i th oenl 

Hi 

f.njrr |. in la i.f ..'. 1 r. • • nr im|.r..»r \ \., f r <i<-. t<«*r<l l).» n .' | >• t« n . if Ik 

of m Li.- - 



7 68 Capitalist Production. 

portant element. At that time the contracts for farms ran for 
a long time, often for 99 years. The progressive fall in the 
value of the precious metals, and therefore of money, brought 
the farmers golden fruit. Apart from all the other circum- 
stances discussed above, it lowered wages. A portion of the 
latter was now added to the profits of the farm. The con- 
tinuous rise in the price of corn, wool, meat, in a word of all 
agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farmer 
without any action on his part, whilst the rent he paid, (being 
calculated on the old value of money) diminished in reality. 1 
Thus they grew rich at the expense both of their labourers and 
their landlords. No wonder therefore, that England, at the 
end of the 16th century, had a class of capitalist farmers, rich, 
considering the circumstances of the time. 1 

1 On the influence of the depreciation of money in the 16th century, on the 
different classes of society, see " A Compendious or Briefe Examination of Certayne 
Ordinary complaints of Diverse of our Countrymen in these our days." By W. S., 
Gentleman. (London 1581). The dialogue form of this work led people for a long 
time to ascribe it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, it was published under his name. 
Its author is William Stafford. In one place the knight reasons as follows : 

Knight: "You, my neighbour, the husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and you 
Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves metely well. For as 
much as all things are deerer than they were, so much do you arise in the pryce of 
your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. But we have nothing to sell where- 
by we might advance ye price there of, to countervaile those things that we must buy 
agayne." In another place the knight asks the doctor : "I pray you, what be those 
sorts that ye meane. And first, of those that ye thinke should have no losse 
thereby ? — Doctor : I mean all those that live by buying and selling, for as they buy 
deare, they sell thereafter. Knight : What is the next sort that ye say would win 
by it ? Doctor : Marry, all such as have takings or fearmes in their owne manurance 
[cultivation] at the old rent, for where they pay after the olde rate they sell after 
the newe — that is, they paye for theire lande good cheape, and sell all things grow- 
ing thereof deare. Knight: What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater 
losse hereby, than these men had profit ? Doctor : It is all noblemen, gentlemen, 
and all other that live either by a stinted rent or stypend, or do not manure [cultiva- 
tion] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling." 

2 In France, the regisseur, steward, collector of dues for the feudal lords during 
the earlier part of the middle ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, who by extor- 
tion, cheating, &c, swindled himself into a capitalist. These regisseurs themselves 
were sometimes noblemen. E. g. " C'est li compte que messire Jacques deThoraine, 
chevalier chastelain sor Besancon rent es-seigneur tenant les comptes a Dijon pour 
monseigneur le due et comte de Bourgoigne, des rentes appartenant a la dite chas- 
tellenie, depuis xxve jour de decembre MCCCLIX jusqu' au xxviiie jour de decem- 
bre MCCCLX. (Alexis Monteil : Histoire des Materiaux manuscrits etc., p. 244.) 
Already it is evident here how in all spheres of social life the lion's share falls to the 
middleman. In the economic domain, e.g., financiers, stock-exchange speculators,, 



iction of tii olution. 



CHAFTEB XXX 

'i'in: I fLUTT >1 

'liii. H0M1 mm. HAL I UiT.M.. 

Tin. expropri expu the agricultural popula- 

tion, intermittent bat rem wed a_ ad again, supplied, 

with a I f ] :ili> 

antin ly ui .. if h the oorpon ;il«l> and do 

t mate dream I I t makea old A. 

An«! w ith .Iain- - An!, i - >n in 

II I Sommei in 1 1 * « - <!i i of 

! W> I:. :it Mil 1 1 A <,\ 

primitn imulation. The thinning-out of the independ 

togc F the indu (trial [ I 

•.-•-I tip ral mal I 

I mallei 

numl s,, il I rth aa macb 

eolation in 

Lv in.; 
metl tli* 

mean- of production, &c , and because not only w. n> the a^ri- 

•he crmm ; In civil mat? *»ycr fler<< 

■ man between th« good •be|>bord ami lua ■ h m p . 

• 

uoompnr* I ' 

17 »'•••«• the farm m nbrr grew roti«Unil>. far beyond 

I -»m |*| »• 

The nj.j.r.Mi'.i. ..f ihe agruultufnl |- i «.!*t;. u ui.ilrr a!) t).< •. |-tij IjrrmnU wtU U 

wore tmce In Prnnc* <e, ebcre U> 

.. 



/jo Capitalist Production. 

cultural wage-labourers put on the strain more intensely, 1 but 
the field of production on which they worked for themselves, 
became more and more contracted. With the setting free of a 
part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former 
means of nourishment were also set free. They were now 
transformed into material elements of variable capital. The 
peasant, expropriated and cast adrift, must buy their value in 
the form of wages, from his new master, the industrial capita- 
list. That which holds good of the means of subsistence holds 
with the raw materials of industry dependent upon home 
agriculture. They were transformed into an element of con- 
stant capital. Suppose, e.g., a part of the Westphalian peas- 
ants, who, at the time of Frederic II, all span flax, forcibly 
expropriated and hunted from the soil ; and the other part that 
remained, turned into day-labourers of large farmers. At the 
same time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weav- 
ing, in which the men " set free " now work for wages. The flax 
looks exactly as before. Not a fibre of it is changed, but a new 
social soul has popped into its body. It forms now a part of 
the constant capital of the master manufacturer. Formerly 
divided among a number of small producers, who cultivated 
it themselves and with their families spun it in retail fashion, 
it is now concentrated in the hand of one capitalist, who sets 
others to spin and weave it for him. The extra labour expen- 
ded in flax-spinning realised itself formerly in extra income to 
numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederic II.'s time, in 
taxes pour le roi de Prusse. It realises itself now in profit for 
a few capitalists. The spindles and looms, formerly scattered 
over the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few 
great labour-barracks, together with the labourers and the raw 
material. And spindles, looms, raw material, are now trans- 
formed, from means of independent existence for the spinners 
and weavers, into means for commanding them and sucking out 
of them unpaid labour. 2 One does not perceive, when looking 
at the large manufactories and the large farms, that they have 

1 A point that Sir James Steuart emphasises. 

2 " Je permettrai," says the capitalist, "que vous ayez l'hormeur de me servir, a 
condition que vous me donnez le peu qui vous restepour la peine que je prends de vous 
commander. (J. J. Rousseau : Discours sur l'Economie Politique.) 



i of the Agricultural I 'ution. ~~\ 

throwing in! I 

[fiction, and bai d built ap by the ti a of 

mall independent pi 1 9. Nei ei I h dar 

Intuition v. fault In the time of M li<>n 

ol the Revolution, the manufactori lied 

manuiacttu ^orkuhope thrown in 

of fields thrown i] Biiral We are only paying 

ntionl odmanufii , in which hundreds of men 

rk under a dii and which are commonly called 

///'/. Those where a very large Dumber of 

I on lii> own 
• h ;. are p o infinite dial 

the others. Thi he tatt me mai 

really imp oal prosperity . . . The 1 

workshop manufacture reunie] will enrich prodigiously 

the Lai will only !>'• journeymen, 

, and will not have any share in I 
til-- nndertakin >p manul 

no one will become rich, bai 

tli.- savii 

will Little capital, to pal by a lift' 

birtl their 1 

wing and ind will iiuToase, 

becati-'- tiny will -••• in ity, a mean 

*■ ^-ntially ning a 

Mnall ri • any ii 

• sole result i^ t«» place men in the position t i 

I 
iiipl- : in j»ri\ .it.- | 

■ 

t" i but they will 

i 

a itli cull 
I 
and ricultui 

»»kau. I • t III rihmn ooMkUn the mfm 

■ 
m«rvly artificial notk* omUr fo*muwm 

;r. at |«r nenUl I 



yj2 Capitalist Production. 

only set free for industrial capital, the labourers, their means 
of subsistence, and material for labour; it also created the home 
market. 

In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into 
wage-labourers, and their means of subsistence and of labour 
into material elements of capital, created, at the same time, a 
home-market for the latter. Formerly, the peasant family 
produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials, which 
they themselves, for the most part, consumed. These raw 
materials and means of subsistence have now become com- 
modities ; the large farmer sells them, he finds his market in 
manufactures. Yarn, linen, coarse woollen stuffs — things 
whose raw materials had been within the reach of every 
peasant family, had been spun and woven by it for its own 
use — were now transformed into articles of manufacture, to 
which the country districts at once served for markets. The 
many scattered customers, whom stray artizans until now 
had found in the numerous small producers working on 
their own account, concentrate themselves now into one great 
market provided for by industrial capital. 1 Thus, hand in 
hand with the expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, 
with their separation from their means of production, goes the 
destruction of rural domestic industry, the process of separation 
between manufacture and agriculture. And only the destruc- 
tion of rural domestic industry can give the internal market 
of a country that extension and consistence which the capitalist 
mode of production requires. Still the manufacturing period* 
properly so-called, does not succeed in carrying out this trans- 
formation radically and completely. It will be remembered 
that manufacture, properly so-called, conquers but partially 
the domain of national production, and always rests on the 
handicrafts of the town and the domestic industry of the rural 

1 "Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into the yearly clothing of a 
labourer's family by its own industry in the intervals of other work — this makes no 
show ; but bring it to market, send it to the factory, thence to the broker, thence to 
tbe dealer, and you will have great commercial operations, and nominal capital 
• ngaged to the amount of twenty times its value. . . . The working class is thus emerced 
to support a wretched factory population, a parasitical shop-keeping class, and a 
fictitious commercial, monetary, and financial system. (David Urquhart, 1. c.,. 
p. 120.) 



Reaction of the . Igricultural R ; ,/ ./ 






di • its ultiiiKit • in. 

in particular bi in point die them up again 

ia] ap • in point It prod 

ck f mall villagers w ho, while foUowing the cultivation 
the soil i calling, find their chief o in 

indostria] Lai produci rhich they sell to the manu- 

bly, or through t fa Liomof merchanta This 

me, though n ■ the chie£ cause of .'i phenomenon which, 

: . nt of English hi >m the 1 

third L5th c befii tinuaUy complaii dy 

interrupt in intervals, lachment of 

• tanning in the country distri ml tin- pi 
i be ]'■ On t i 

liii-U this p<-;i-;tiitry turning up a_'ain, although in diminished 

number, and always uiuh-r \\ ulition The chief 

England I ime chieflj 

By a breeder of cattle, in arte: - I n ith 

nt cultivation find 
Iii'lu 1 finally, supplies, in macl the 1 

capitalistic agricultui [propriates radically the 
I he agricultural population, and <•. ,nipl«'tea 

the on b iltmv aipl rural i in- 

<lu 

' I iKt< .1, Um maw of 

BBflifth people of all grade* rOM fr ink 

undi r 1 I i'>r». 

mrare tl. ha* »pm 

row;' an lcaa noblo pm&tifi 

« 

not with uiirrtu 

<1 iiAtiMti, tt)p>*«> i . bo KngUixl H i t. | .i >»jr 

*» J liAn Im'i'I, liCOfcUM ' 

jm rmif t« -I hf Mi., ;!»i. I t<> »ti • !. K -t !.. n t).. m*< U< • |.\ tl.. i »• ' • ••• i if .i*l 

iDJaaoi bttw—u i M*»« 

• •■ 

» treat RoaMftl i'fo- 



774 Capitalist Production. 

It therefore also, for the first time, conquers for industrial capital 
the entire home market. 1 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

GENESIS OF THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITALIST. 

The genesis of the industrial 2 capitalist did not proceed in 
such a gradual way as that of the farmer. Doubtless many 
small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans, 
or even wage-labourers, transformed themselves into small 
capitalists, and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage- 
labour and corresponding accumulation) into full-blown capi- 
talists. In the infancy of capitalist production, things often 
happened as in the infancy of mediaeval towns, where the 
question, which of the escaped serfs should be master and which 
servant, was in great part decided by the earlier or later date 
of their flight. The snail's-pace of this method corresponded 
in no wise with the commercial requirements of the new world- 
market that the great discoveries of the end of the loth century 
created. But the middle ages had handed down two distinct 
forms of capital, which mature in the most different economic 
social formations, and which, before the era of the capitalist 
mode of production, are considered as capital quand meme — 
usurer's capital and merchant's capital. 

" At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the pos- 
session of the capitalist .... he pays the landowner his rent, 
the labourer his wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, 
and keeps a large, indeed the largest, and a continually aug- 

1 Philanthropic English economists, like Mill, Rogers, Goldwin, Smith, Fawcett, 
&c, and liberal manufacturers like John Bright & Co., ask the English landed 
proprietors, as God asked Cain after Abel, Where are our thousands of freeholders 
gone ? But where do you come from, then ? From the destruction of those free- 
holders. Why don't you ask further, where are the independent weavers, spinners, 
and artizans gone ? 

2 Industrial here in contradistinction to agricultural. In the " categoric " sense 
the farmer is an industrial capitalist as much as the manufacturer 



.» of /'':■ In .. trial Capital 



I 



menl is I the annual | 

] dist in be firai r of all the 

mmonity, though no law b him 

.... tlii 

d capital .... and it is aot a little 
carious that all the lav. 'I! u ■: • an 

• this \>y >tatut»-s, \ ix, >tatutea against Otorj The 

pon r all the wealth ie a 

complete change in i propert I by what Ian 

• •s of l.-i The .'^'i r b< i ihoold 1. 
membere it by law 

The d i by mi ■ I usury and 

,i taming into industrial capital, in the 
iuda] constitution, in the I aild 

i vanished with the dia d of 

feudal . w 1th ion and partial 

populai ion. new manuf 

tttrol of 
; municipalities ami tli.-ir -niM I ! • 
emb »wm a 

lU'lu-tiial nm 

i and silver in 
• and -iit imbnient in mini •«* <>f t 
U'^inn ' >e8t an<l 

the a into a wi 

t be comiuim ial Imntii < >\ tl. 

bief oion 

theii 

j. 

tlie 

bin v n in tha O] 

1 
I I primitive n 

1 



7J6 Capitalist Production. 

themselves now, more or less in chronological order, par- 
ticularly over Spain, Portugal, Holland, France, and England. 
In England at the end of the 17th century, they arrive at a 
systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the national 
debt, the modern mode of taxation, and. the protectionist 
system. These methods depend in part on brute force, e.g., 
the colonial system. But they all employ the power of the 
State, the concentrated and organised force of society, to hasten, 
hothouse fashion, the process of transformation of the feudal 
mode of production into the capitalist mode, and to shorten the 
transition. Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant 
with a new one. It is itself an economic power. 

Of the Christian colonial system, W. Howitt, a man who 
makes a speciality of Christianity, says : " The barbarities and 
desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout 
every region of the world, and upon every people they have 
been able to subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any 
other race, however fierce, however untaught, and however 
reckless of mercy and of shame, in any age of the earth." 1 The 
historv of the colonial administration of Holland — and Holland 
was the head capitalistic nation of the 17th century — " is one 
of the most extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, 
massacre, and meanness." 2 Nothing is more characteristic 
than their system of stealing men, to get slaves for Java. The 
men stealers were trained for this purpose. The thief, the in- 
terpreter, and the seller, were the chief agents in this trade, 
native princes the chief sellers. The young people stolen, were 
thrown into the secret dungeons of Celebes, until they were 
ready for sending to the slave-ships. An official report says : 
*' This one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of secret prisons, one 
more horrible than the other, crammed with unfortunates, 
victims of greed and tyranny fettered in chains, forcibly torn 

1 William Howitt : ' ' Colonisation and Christianity : A Popular History of the 
Treatment of the Natives by the Europeans in all their Colonies." London, 1838, 
p. 9. On the treatment of the slaves there is a good compilation in Charles Comte, 
Traite de la Legislation. 3me ed. Bruxelles, 1837. This subject one must study in 
detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of itself and of the labourer, wherever it 
can, without restraint, model the world after its own image. 

2 Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut. -Gov. of that island : " History of Java and 
its dependencies." Lond., 1817. 



is of the Industrial ~~~ 

m their famili . T I Dotch cornipi 

mar. B L641. 

They homed 

tain " from the paymeu 
W'li- 'i follon 

province of •' L750 numl I 

inhabits d 1 $1 l on i 
Th t India < 

liticaJ role in 1 
■ 

from Mm But \ 

dia ai. 

the i 
ay, 1 aopoli 

in* »« lit ii ble mi] th. The em- 

ployed I and j»' at will (he 

; i I I in this 

traffic, II : . 

' UJ» lik 

i di accomuL 

caeoe. Sen ii an Knetm \ im wai 

i an 

I 
Boll Binn for £ I".o00; 

■i "M ■• i the ult. 

all h<- 
./am A •■• •.!'!: Ll : 

I" I I it>. finpl 

aaaegifl I tw« n l 

am] up 

all ' 

m|»< w»» up 
| nc« ml ■■ »rrc *.!•! In lh< 



yyS Capitalist Production. 

ful in plantation-colonies destined for export trade only, such 
as the West Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, 
such as Mexico and India, that were given over to plunder. 
But even in the colonies properly so-called, the Christian 
character of primitive accumulation did not belie itself. Those 
sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New England, 
in 1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on 
every Indian scalp and every captured red-skin : in 1720 a 
premium of £100 on every scalp ; in 1744, after Massachusetts- 
Bay had proclaimed a certain tribe as rebels, the following 
prices: for a male scalp of 12 years and upwards £100 (new 
currency), for a male prisoner £105, for women and children 
prisoners £50, for scalps of women and children £50. Some 
decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on the de- 
scendants of the pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown 
seditious in the meantime. At English instigation and for 
English pay they were tomahawked by red-skins. The 
British Parliament proclaimed blood-hounds and scalping as 
" means that God and Nature had given into its hand." 

The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and 
navigation. The " societies Monopolia " of Luther were power- 
ful levers for concentration of capital. The colonies secured a 
market for the budding manufactures, and, through the 
monopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. The 
treasures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, 
enslavement, and murder, floated back to the mother-country 
and were there turned into capital. Holland, which first fully 
developed the colonial system, in 1648 stood already in the 
acme of its commercial greatness. It was " in almost exclu- 
sive possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce be- 
tween the south-east and north-west of Europe. Its fisheries, 
marine, manufactures, surpassed those of any other country. 
The total capital of the Republic was probably more important 
than that of all the rest of Europe put together." Giilich for- 
gets to add that by 1648, the people of Holland were more 
overworked, poorer and more brutally oppressed than those of 
all the rest of Europe put together. 

To-day industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. 



G f ' ' Industr C t. 

In t 

tli- <;«>iiiiuen.-iiil 

dom II : 

it that t'n. I' • i 

jowl with • I 

One day u it h i ih< 'V.- and a kick chu 
tbem all of a heap. !• i sur|»l ie mak 

pi and aim of human H v. 

puhlic ci ional « 1 • - 1 • t -, \\h« — • 

I a and V. the mid 

;• 

I lit. iiiaritim ' 

and commercial wars aci 

.a BoUao : \ ■ the ali 

repul 
mp tli.- capitalistic 
; •'c-alth that 

rial <1 

aa a mM xaoa r;. 
i ply it Lh in d 

I ' comes 1 1 

rise il debt-male ith in th 

place "t tin Holy ( 

u 

• ii A \\ ith t! 

into capital, 

• vi-ii in 

i 
bich g 

th«> iraaith <>( th«« i 

i tax- 



780 Capitalist Production. 

farmers, merchants, private manufacturers, to whom a good 
part of every national loan renders the service of a capital 
fallen from heaven — the national debt has given rise to joint- 
stock companies, to dealings in negotiable effects of all kinds, 
and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange gambling and 
the modern bankocracy. 

At their birth the great banks, decorated with national 
titles, were only associations of private speculators, who placed 
themselves by the side of governments, and, thanks to the 
privileges they received, were in a position to advance money 
to the state. Hence the accumulation of the national debt has 
no more infallible measure than the successive rise in the stock 
of these banks, whose full development dates from the found- 
ing of the Bank of England in 1694. The Bank of England 
began with lending its money to the Government at %°/ Q ; at 
the same time it was empowered by Parliament to coin money 
out of the same capital, by lending it again to the public in 
the form of bank-notes. It was allowed, to use these notes for 
discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for 
buying the precious metals. It was not long ere this credit- 
money, made by the bank itself, became the coin in which the 
Bank of England made its loans to the state, and paid, on ac- 
count of the state, the interest on the public debt. It was not 
enough that the bank gave with one hand and took back 
more with the other ; it remained, even whilst receiving, the 
eternal creditor of the nation down to the last shilling advanced. 
Gradually it became inevitably the receptacle of the metallic 
hoard of the country, and the centre of gravity of all com- 
mercial credit. What effect was produced on their contem- 
poraries by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats, 
financiers, rentiers, brokers, stock-jobbers, &c, is proved by the 
writings of that time, e.g., by Bolingbroke's. 1 

With the national debt arose an international credit system, 
which often conceals one of the sources of primitive accumula- 
tion in this or that people. Thus the villanies of the Venetian 

1 " Si les Tartares inoudaient l'Europe aujourd'hui, il faudrait bien des affaires 
pour leur faire entendre ce que c'est qu'un financier parmi nous.''" Montesquieu 
Esprit des lois, t. iv. p. 33, ed. Londres, 1769. 



G of ik / 1 1 Capitalist. 

thieving 

i I Hand to irhom \ lent 1 

■am it n ith Holland and I 

! l 5 •'■• e atory tl Dutch manu 

far outstrip^ Holland bad ceased to be 

nati and Indus! \\ I its 

uiaiii lines "i I'U in i7"i - i , , the I 

.in ol enormoc i amooi 
rival England. J be y 1 eti 

I i»'l tl A 

which appears to-day In the United i with 

i birth, I 

children. 
A > tli 
\shi<-h i Lily payment 

I d The loai ■ enable ti. 

■s, without t : 

but ti i Dsequ< 

cau> 

axes on the most nec essar y me; mb- 

an ii In II 

t- in v. tied, tl I » 

IS in 1. it as I 
making t ho wag< 

i 

oondil : the wage-la 

■ I, all •!' n tit : 

•?ro are i 

I • 

• ,1 furtl tened I | sssn tcct; n. 

OHS of its integral part*. 



782 Capitalist Production. 

The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system 
corresponding with it, has played in the capitalisation of 
wealth and the expropriation of the masses, has led many 
writers, like Cobbett, Doubleday and others, to seek in this, 
incorrectly, the fundamental cause of the misery of the modern 
peoples. 

The system of protection was an artificial means of manufac- 
turing manufacturers, of expropriating independent labourers, of 
capitalising the national means of production and subsistence, of 
forcibly abbreviating the transition from the mediaeval to the 
modern mode of production. The European states tore one an- 
other to pieces about the patent of this invention, and, once entered 
into the service of the surplus- value makers, did not merely 
lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own 
people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through 
export premiums. They also forcibly rooted out, in their de- 
pendent countries, all industry, as, e.g., England did with the 
Irish woollen manufacture. On the continent of Europe, after 
Colbert's example, the process was much simplified. The 
primitive industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of 
the state treasury. " Why," cries Mirabeau. "why go so far to 
seek the cause of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before 
the war ? 180,000,000 of debts contracted by the sovereigns I" 1 

Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, com- 
mercial wars, &c., these children of the true manufacturing 
period, increase gigantically during the infancy of Modern 
Industry. The birth of the latter is heralded by a great 
slaughter of the innocents. Like the royal navy, the factories 
were recruited by means of the press-gang. Blase as Sir F. M. 
Eden is as to the horrors of the expropriation of the agricul- 
tural population from the soil from the last third of the loth 
century to his own time : with all the self-satisfaction with 
which he rejoices in this process, " essential " for establishing 
capitalistic agriculture and " the due proportion between 
arable and pasture land " — he does not show, however, the 
same economic insight in respect to the necessity of child-steal- 
ing and child-slavery for the transformation of manufacturing 

1 Mirabeau, 1. c. , t. vi., p. 10]. 



G nests of the 1 ! Capita! 

exploitation in t, and I iblishn 

ation 1 and labour-power Be 

i- may, perhaps, be worthy I public 

.v in.'iiHif which, in 

■'■•.•s.sfully, requires I /••> ami w<>rkii<iii8e8 

should Iced i'>v | bildren old be 

<-mj ' night I 

robl prhich, though in 

and thai qui t 

different ages and di r in 

inch e manner thai the cample rami' I I 

to prof! ill add 

u.-il 

I n • D N ' • und 

more ; y in Lanca bin Pielden, ■ the i 

1 machin ;-• ! in lar^- fn built CO the 

the water-wheel Thou- 
i' bands w< Idenly require 1 in these places, 

I oashire, in particul ! then, 

Com] thinly | : 

all tl nt« I T ill ami nimble fin 

little children being !»\ 

torn in • ni the 

• 111!' Itirinii ad else* 

where, M u isc Little, ha| 

1'iwn inl » the tlm 

age 'i \ \ 

clothe lii i appi 1 and \<»\ \ in an "a|»|>i 

I I ;ir t li 

whose int«r«-,t it Wl 

the u tn Bcause tlwir pay wa 

ild sxacl i 

In 
I in tli«« guill h I 

i • ■ : I. u. . .1 !. i 

Send i i 
■ consigned t < • 1 1 , 

l ril. 



784 Capitalist Production. 

they were harassed to the brink of death by excess of labour 
. . . were flogged, fettered and tortured in the most exquisite 
refinement of cruelty ; . . . they were in many cases starved 
to the bone while flowed to their work and .... even in 
some instances . . . were driven to commit suicide . . . The 
beautiful and romantic valleys of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire 
and Lancashire, secluded from the public eye, became the 
dismal solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. The 
profits of manufactures were enormous ; but this only whetted 
the appetite that it should have satisfied, and therefore the 
manufacturers had recourse to an expedient that seemed to 
secure to them those profits without any possibility of limit ; 
they began the practice of what is termed " night- working," 
that is, having tired one set of hands, by working them 
throughout the day, they had another set ready to go on 
working throughout the night ; the day-set getting into the 
beds that the night-set had just quitted, and in their turn 
again, the night-set getting into the beds that the day-set 
quitted in the morning. It is a common tradition in Lanca- 
shire, that the beds never get cold." 1 

With the development of capitalist production during the 
manufacturing period, the public opinion of Europe had lost 
the last remnant of shame and conscience. The nations 
bragged cynically of every infan^ that served them as a means 

1 John Fielden, 1. c. pp. 5, 6. On the earlier infamies of the factory system, cf. 
Dr. Aikin (1795) 1. c. p. 219, and Gisborne : Enquiry into the Duties of Men, 1795, 
Vol. II. When the steam-engine transplanted the factories from the country water- 
falls to the middle of towns, the "abstemious" surplus-value maker found the child- 
material ready to his hand, without being forced to seek slaves from the workhouses. 
"When Sir B. Peel, (father of the " minister of plausibility "), brought in his bill for the 
protection of children, in 1815, Francis Horner, lumen of the Bullion Committee and 
intimate friend of Bicardo, said in the House of Commons: "It is notorious, that 
with a bankrupt's effects, a gang, if he might use the word, of these children had 
been put up to sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the property. A most 
atrocious instance had been brought before the Court of King's Bench two years 
before, in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in London to one 
manufacturer, had been transferred to another, and had been found by some benevo- 
lent persons in a state of absolute famine. Another case more horrible had come to 
his knowledge while on a [Parliamentary] Committee .... that not many years 
ago, an agreement had been made between a London parish and a Lancashire manu- 
facturer, by which it was stipulated, that with every 20 sound children one idiot 
should be taken." 



Gen is of the Ind.i Capltai 7S5 

capitalistic aooomiilatioo. EL of 

« 11 1 [en it 1- ti nn 

triumph I I . 

privil 1 t > ply the 

until ti. I 1 and the 1 English 

oiafa America a.s well. I 
[uired the right of su| 
I with Thi 

I Livei 

wax 

'. 

■ iii- 
\ kin [1795] already quoted — a ha> .led 

• which lias . 
1 aii-1 ■ 1 it* pi 

, h&fl 1 
• •;itlv 

\..\ n p '1 em] in the 

I 73 1, 15 si . L751, 58 . in 17'.". 7 I 

: 

W In! in 

l m the nralni ms- 

rchal 

In 
I 
j. in 

f|i lal 

■ 
I 
I 

It 

. ■ 

Um IhuvfMB 



786 Capitalist Production. 

money, according to Augier, 1 " comes into the world with a con- 
genital blood-stain on one cheek," capital comes dripping from 
head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt. 2 



CHAPTER XXXII 

HISTORICAL TENDENCY OF CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION. 

What does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e., its histori- 
cal genesis, resolve itself into ? In so far as it is not immediate 
transformation of slaves and serfs into wage-labourers, and 
therefore a mere change of form, it only means the expropriation 
of the immediate producers, i.e., the dissolution of private pro- 
perty based on the labour of its owner. Private property, as 
the antithesis to social, collective property, exists only where 

when the class of wage -labourers becomes noticeable. This term is used in 
opposition, on the one hand, to the " idle poor," beggars, etc., on the other to those 
labourers, who, pigeons not yet plucked, are still possessors of their own means of 
labour. From the Statute Book it passed into political economy, and was handed 
down by Culpeper, J. Child, etc., to Adam Smith and Eden. After this, one 
can judge of the good faith of the " execrable political cant- monger," Edmund Burke, 
when he called the expression, " labouring poor," — " execrable political cant." This 
sycophant who, in the pay of the English oligarchy, played the romantic laudator 
temporis acti against the French Revolution, just as, in the pay of the North American 
Colonies, at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the Liberal against 
the English oligarchy, was an out and out vulgar bourgeois. " The laws of commerce 
are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God." (E. Burke, I.e., pp. 31, 32.) 
No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always sold himself in 
the best market. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, during his liberal time, 
is to be found in the writings of the Rev. Mr. Tucker. Tucker was a parson and a 
Tory, but, for the rest, an honourable man and a competent political economist. In 
face of the infamous cowardice of character that reigns to-day, and believes most 
devoutly in "the laws of commerce," it is our bounden duty again and again to 
brand the Burkes, who only differ from their successors in one thing-talent. 

1 Marie Augier : Du Credit Public. Paris, 1842. 

2 "Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to 
be timid, which is very true ; but this is very incompletely stating the question. 
Capital eschews no profit, or very small profit, just as Nature was formerly said to 
abhor a vacuum. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. A certain 10 per cent, 
will ensure its employment anywhere ; 20 per cent, certain will produce eagerness ; 
50 per cent., positive audacity ; 100 per cent, will make it ready to trample on all 
human laws ; 300 per cent., and there is not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a 
risk it will not run, even to the chance of its owner being hanged. If turbulence and 
strife will bring a profit, it will freely encourage both. Smuggling and the slave-trade 
have amply proved all that is here stated." (P. J. Dunning, 1. c. p. 35.) 



Historical 7\ \ v of Accumul 
I I r and the • of labour 

.dividual-*. Boi thex* ]«ri- 

individuals ai r not L 

• • T numUrl< .... t j rvt 

>I> »n 1 t<> til-- intermediate ^ta_;.s h 

the 
r in hi is the foui n <»f i 

iii'lu try, wli.-tli- ' man u fact ui 

ind . lii ♦•initial c< »;». 1 .pin.-ni 

sj prodaction ind of t! individual:- the 

, this petty n» 
■ undei 

• it flourishes), it leti loose it^ wlio! _ry. it attains it^ 

adequa' is the pi i 

m d means of lab< mi -•■: in tin- 

j lari-1 which be onltivatea, the a' 

which it*- handles as a virtuoso Th 

[taroeli I. and •-,•;.• •},«.( 

mean^ <*f |ir<>du<r . •, n-f these 

meai 
<»f la n, tli<' 

d the | \<\ 

•■ d«\ 
> compatible only * 
and in »ving within n 

a I', i -| . 

rsal m- At .1 

opn bi ingi foi th 1 

It 

lated . -d Its aim i 

I 

into 

.H <>ft! 



j88 Capitalist Production. 

capital. It comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we 
have passed in review only those that have been epoch-making 
as methods of the primitive accumulation of capital. The ex- 
propriation of the immediate producers was accomplished with 
merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the 
most infamous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly 
odious. Self-earned private property, that is based, so to say, 
on the fusing together of the isolated, independent labouring- 
individual with the conditions of his labour, is supplanted by 
capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the 
nominally free labour of others, i.e., on wages-labour. 1 

As soon as this process of tranformation has sufficiently de- 
composed the old society from top to bottom, as soon as 
the labourers are turned into proletarians, their means of 
labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion stands on its own feet, then the further socialisation of 
labour and further transformation of the land and other means of 
production into socially exploited and, therefore, common means 
of production, as well as the further expropriation of private 
proprietors, takes a new form. That which is now to be ex- 
propriated is no longer the labourer working for himself, but 
the capitalist exploiting many labourers. This expropriation 
is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capital- 
istic production itself, by the centralisation of capital. One 
capitalist always kills many. Hand in hand with this central- 
isation, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, 
develop, on an ever extending scale, the co-operative form of the 
labour-process, the conscious technical application of science, 
the methodical cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the 
instruments of labour into instruments of labour only usable 
in common, the economising of all means of production by 
their use as the means of production of combined, socialised 
labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world- 
market, and with this, the international character of the capi- 
talistic regime. Along with the constantly diminishing number 

1 " Nous sommes dans une condition tout-a-fait nouvelle de la societe" . . . nous 
tendons a separer toute espece de propriete d'avec toute espece de travail. " (Sismondi : 
JS'ouveaux Principes de l'Econ. Polit. t. II., p. 434.) 



Historical Tendency of Accumulati -9 

of the in. ; capital, irho usurp and m all 

1 injili 11 _:• m I the maKS 

of 11 illation, sxp] d j bot 

witli t; the revolt of the worku 1 class 

j in nuin: :i'l di« 

by I be i • ' y in< chanism <>f I be proc 1 1 1 ca] 
taction I • 1: is Ljiitul Im o.ii.- - ,-t i. • 

opoo the m production, which \ni* sprang op 1 

Boui along wit li, and nnder it I 

of pi odad 1 social boor at L ch ;t j 

with tii'-;r ca] italiai into 
1 merit is b I knellol 

propei t y toond I pr >pi i ezpro] 

. pitalist in appropriation, the n 

pro luction prodaoescapitalist private pro] 
the first n< individual private pro] I <<n 

Bat capitali I 
with 1 i • ■ own n Lion. It is 

I 
r tii.- ; . ■ -, iii 111 in 

00 I Lion 

>lull 111 ' II lit' t . 

of 1 

1 J ! iv.lti- ] 

,i individu I private 1 

v, ■ pi imparabl) m 

<lit!i«Mjlt, than tl. pro 

:.• tm_: • «•'! }" 

In t in., r « 

1 few 
Kpropi 

- Ubo w w, ' 

■. ... I 

•> >' the bourfvoi*' 
«li«g«M- lU fall | 
lie oUuri, that lUml fac« ' • . 



79° Capitalist Prodtiction. 

CHAPTER XXXIIL 

THE MODERN THEORY OF COLONISATION. 

Political economy confuses on principle two very different 
kinds of private property, of which one rests on the producers' 
own labour, the other on the employment of the labour of 
others. It forgets that the latter not only is the direct anti- 
thesis of the former, but absolutely grows on its tomb only. 
In Western Europe, the home of political economy, the process 
of primitive accumulation is more or less accomplished. Here 
the capitalist regime has either directly conquered the whole 
domain of national production, or, where economic conditions 
are less developed, it, at least, indirectly controls those strata of 
society which, though belonging to the antiquated mode of pro- 
duction, continue to exist side by side with it in gradual decay. 
To this ready-made world of capital, the political economist 
applies the notions of law and of property inherited from a pre- 
capitalistic world with all the more anxious zeal and all the 
greater unction, the more loudly the facts cry out in the face of 
his ideology. It is otherwise in the colonies. There the capitalist 
regime everywhere comes into collision with the resistance of 
the producer, who, as owner of his own conditions of labour, 
employs that labour to enrich himself, instead of the capitalist. 
The contradiction of these two diametrically opposed economic 
systems, manifests itself here practically in a struggle between 
them. Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the 
mother-country, he tries to clear out of his way by force, the 
modes of production and appropriation, based on his indepen- 
dent labour of the producer. The same interest, which compels 

really revolutionary class. The other classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern 
Industry, the proletariat is its special and essential product. . . The lower middle- 
classes, the small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the peasant, all these 
nodit against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions of the 
middle-class . . . they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of 
history. " Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei," 
London, 1847, pp. 9, 11. 

1 We treat here of real Colonies, virgin soils, colonised by free immigrants. The 
United States are, speaking economically, still only a Colony of Europe. Besides, 
to this category belong also such old plantations as those in which the abolition of 
slavery has completely altered the earlier conditions. 



The Modern Theory of Colonisation. 791 

\\\*> lyeophant of capital, the political economist, in the mother- 
country, to | m the theoretical 1 lentity of the capitalist 

made of production with it^ c .-, that same inten 

him in tin.' ooloniei t«> make ■ dean bn 1 t-» 

proclaim aloud the antagonism <»f the two mo lee of pro lud 
To thi- end be provee bow the development of the ■ 
[active power of lab tion, division of labour, 

of machinery on a large scale, a impossible without the 

bi •!! of the labour rs, and the ponding iranafor- 

■i of their m< f pi lud pita! I o 

int. ■ the so-called national :• artificial 

ire the poi I the peopla 1 [ere bi 

armour crumblee off, hit by hit, lik»- It is 

1 1 Wakefiel ay- 

thin"' rn?\v ahoiit tin* ( 'olonirs, 1 hut t-» ha\ ; in the 

< Soloniee the truth ai t<> the conditions of capitalist production 
in tl a I b • 

! to mannfad ipitalists artificially in the 

ber-country, s.> Wakefi* which 

and tried for a t ime lets of P 

manul >rkere in the 

1 ui'-s. Tl, 

I all, Wak< field «h 'i tin- ' 

• . in Hi"?. •', in.'K-hii n 1 <>th< r 

tnean of production, does I ilial 

it' there be 

1 1<» .s<«ll bimself of 1 
r-'l t! it a s.i :ial n 

tin- mstruiM-uitalil . 
thin I'i'ol, be 1 k with linn from I ml to 

! ' meani .• an.l of | 

■ 

■ 
. 

«rUin eireomcUno** bo btoontM % 
cotton. Only un<Ur cortoin «irwmatnnooa dor* tl I n co w 
U— riroomotnnc • ■ mom copiul t»»*n *.»' l i» 

jriooof Migft* <-»,.•.«,.*.- . icUti r, ..f |.r\Mlu*Uuo. 



79 2 Capitalist Production. 

duction to the amount of £50,000. Mr. Peel had the foresight 
to bring with him, besides, 3000 persons of the working-class, 
men, women, and children. Once arrived at his destination, 
" Mr. Peel was left without a servant to make his bed or fetch 
him water from the river." 1 Unhappy Mr. Peel who provided 
for everything except the export of English modes of pro- 
duction to Swan River ! 

For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wake- 
field, two preliminary remarks : We know that the means of 
production and subsistence, while they remain the property of 
the immediate producer, are not capital. They become capital, 
only under circumstances in which they serve at the same 
time as means of exploitation and subjection of the labourer. 
But this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately wedded, in the 
head of the political economist, to their material substance, that 
he christens them capital under all circumstances, even when 
they are its exact opposite. Thus is it with Wakefield. 
Further : the splitting up of the means of production into the 
individual property of many independent labourers, working 
on their own account, he calls equal division of capital. It is 
with the political economist as with the feudal jurist. The 
latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the labels supplied 
by feudal law. 

" If," says Wakefield, " all the members of the society 
are supposed to possess equal portions of capital .... 
no man would have a motive for accumulating more capital 
than he could use with his own hands. This is to some extent 
the case in new American settlements, where a passion for 
owning land prevents the existence of a class of labourers for 
hire." 2 So long, therefore, as the labourer can accumulate for 
himself — and this he can do so long as he remains possessor of 
his means of production — capitalist accumulation and the 
capitalistic mode of production are impossible. The class of 
wage-labourers, essential to these, is wanting. How, then, in 
old Europe, was the expropriation of the labourer from his 

It is a historical relation of production. (Karl Marx, " Lohnarbeit und Kapital." 
N. Rh. Z. No. 266, April 7, 1849.) 

1 E. G. Wakefield : England and America, vol. ii., p. 33. 

»L c.,p.l7. 



75b M dem Theory of Colonisation. 

of labour; i*e. t ti and wa 

labour, brooght aboui By a m 

! kind. " Mankind bare adopted a • • • . simple oon- 
r pros the accumulation of capita]/ 1 which 

\ • 1 ; 1 1 1 1 , fl m their ii u a* 

the and i en 4 then 

themselves in! capita] and owi Irth. »ur .... 

divi and combinat In 

tip- in i- ^ «»f mankirj I expropriated itself in honour 
of the 'tiM think. 1 1 

this instinct I ienying fanaticism would If full fl 

especially ii ndi- 

tion : ' al «"nf in a dn am I litv. 

ooloniaati Ih^l 

in to replace ii Lionl 

" In the Northern States of the American Union, it 
. be doubted whether so many as e tent 1 1 

witiiM fall uinlrr tip- <l«-scrij>t \<>n of hiiv.l lal In 

the - plane <-..mj. 

• be imp the part ol 

>t rapil s<> li 

.■■•• .r-Ii Wak«-ti«'l<l liii: ' 

basi ; I Gonial wealth Hiasystei 
he unfortunately 
tves. " The t Doinii 

tin lal I ."'it I . heir 

lOOtl haw Ih-i-ii 

• litii ml which each iuld 

emp !•• 1 m 

• • ■ . • • 1 by 1 ; I 

,'iii <"'N. imp] 

. f it, 
••r has I'luacrvt"! imnli m ! than hi can 

1 

\\ lhH ..f ( 



794 Capitalist Production. 

the bulk of the soil is still public property, and every settler on 
it therefore can turn part of it into his private property and 
individual means of production, without hindering the later 
settlers in the same operation. 1 This is the secret both of the 
prosperity of the colonies and of their inveterate vice — 
opposition to the establishment of capital. " Where land is 
very cheap and all men are free, where every one who so 
pleases can easily obtain a piece of land for himself, not only 
is labour very dear, as respects the labourer's share of the pro- 
duce, but the difficulty is to obtain combined labour at any price." 2 

As in the colonies the separation of the labourer from the 
conditions of labour and their root, the soil, does not yet exist, 
or only sporadically, or on too limited a scale, so neither does 
the separation of agriculture from industry exist, nor the de- 
struction of the household industry of the peasantry. Whence 
then is to come the internal market for capital ? " No part of 
the population of America is exclusively agricultural, excepting 
slaves and their employers who combine capital and labour in 
particular works. Free Americans, who cultivate the soil, 
follow many other occupations. Some portion of the furniture 
and tools which they use is commonly made by themselves. 
They frequently build their own houses, and carry to market, 
at whatever distance, the produce of their own industry. They 
are spinners and weavers ; they make soap and candles, as well 
as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use. In 
America the cultivation of land is often the secondary pursuit 
of a blacksmith, a miller or a shopkeeper." 3 With such queer 
people as these, where is the " field of abstinence " for the 
capitalists ? 

The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this — 
that it not only constantly reproduces the wage-worker as 
wage-worker, but produces always, in proportion to the 
accumulation of capital, a relative surplus population of wage- 
workers. Thus the law of supply and demand of labour is kept 
in the right rut, the oscillation of wages is penned within limits 

1 "Land, to be an clement of colonization, must not only be waste, but it must be 
public property, liable to be converted into private property." (1. c. Vol. II., p 125.) 
a 1. c. Vol. I. p. 247. 3 1. c. pp 21, 22. 



The Modem TJuory of Colonisation. 795 

t exploitati m, and lastly, the 

:' Ujc la t <>n the capital i t, tl 

D imuii 

vrhicfa 1 1 mi t, at borne, in bh< 

• ry, can ti _ r i ify into one of fi 1 

nd wllei in equally in lep< tnmodil 

I be ownei of the c immodil 

iity lal Bill in th( !ii«> tlii^ J 

asund< 1 population Ini •• ii mn-h in 

quickly than in tbe motber-coontry, b many la 

r I bi a nid • made 1 lull . and 3 • t the Is) 

undei Tl I m ■■ I Q pply *nd 

< hi tlin.rn,' hand, I 

on the other, ti. tar r.-j 1 h-- u.o-- 

witli iin] 

mente the nd in part invincible What ba- 

i- iin ;' vrage-labooj 1 srnamarary in 

oomulatii ■ I J The a ■ 1 

n an independent : 

1 1 

the 

. tbem 

1 the 

• •-. t !r I 

• ■ 

1 1 n 

I 

I 
..nl\ • 

; be largt', tl 
f i1np» ao gi I"- ao m U 

1 1 11 . ,. 111 



796 Capitalist Production. 

late great masses of wealth." 1 The labourers most distinctly 
declines to allow the capitalist to abstain from the payment of 
the greater part of their labour. It avails him nothing, if he 
is so cunning as to import from Europe, with his own capital, 
his own wage- workers. They soon " cease ... to be labourers 
for hire; they . . . become independent landowners, if not com- 
petitors with their former masters in the labour market." 2 
Think of the horror ! The excellent capitalist has imported 
bodily from Europe, with his own good money, his own 
competitors ! The end of the world has come ! No wonder 
Wakefield laments the absence of all dependence and of all 
sentiment of dependence on the part of the wage-workers 
in the colonies. On account of the high wages, says his 
disciple, Merivale, there is in the colonies " the urgent desire 
for cheaper and more subservient labourers — for a class to 
whom the capitalist might dictate terms, instead of being 
dictated to by them. . . In ancient civilized countries the 
labourer, though free, is by a law of nature dependent on 
capitalists ; in colonies this dependence must be created by 
artificial means." 3 

What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this 

- 1. c, Vol. I., p. 131. 2 1. c, Vol. II., p. 5. 

3 Merivale, 1. c, Vol. II., pp. 235-314 passim. Even the mild, free-trade, vulgar 
economist, Molinari, says : "Dans les colonies ou l'esclavage a ete aboli sans que le 
travail force se trnuvait remplace par une quantite equivalente de travail libre, on a 
vu s'operer la contre-partie du fait qui se realise tous les jours sous nos yeux. On a 
vu les simples travailleurs exploiter a leur tour les entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger 
d'eux des salaires hors de toute proportion avec la part legitime qui leur revenait dans 
le produit. Les planteurs, ne pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour 
couvrir la hausse de salaire, ont ete obliges de fournir l'excedant, d'abord sur leurs 
profits, ensuite sur leurs capitaux memes. Une foule de planteurs ont ete ruines de 
la sorte, d'autres ont ferme leurs ateliers pour echapper a une ruine imminente. . . 
Sans doute, il vaut mieux voir perir des accumulations de capitaux que des genera- 
tions d'hommes [how generous of Mr. Molinari !] : mais ne vaudrait-il pas mieux que 
ni les uns ni les autres perissent?" (Molinari 1. c. pp. 51, 52.) Mr. Molinari, Mr. 
Molinari ! What then becomes of the ten commandments, of Moses and the prophets, 
of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe the "entrepreneur" can cut down the 
labourer's legitimate part, and in the West Indies, the labourer can cut down the entre- 
preneur's? And what, if you please, is this "legitimate part," which on your own 
showing the capitalist in Europe daily neglects to pay ? Over yonder, in the colonies 
where the labourers are so " simple " as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr. Molinari 
feels a strong itching to set the law of supply and demand, that works elsewhere 
automatically, on the right road by means of the police. 



The Modem Theory of Colonisation* 

unfurtir bate of things in tl A " I 

lency i " of pro th. l 

of prod l iniiu:. 

able own* i :i their own tmihilatet 

with the cent found 

bined J I I nnderl 

in beii 'In Ear pita! in\ ■ 

without hesitatii the working 

iti living appurtenai 

iii 1 1 . • tul 

He i talking wil 
an 1 k, wh( 

• and dep |iernun 

1 i ipitaV av 
una, " w i which requi i 

►OX \s lr«ii, we ki: 

It V. 

Mich emigrant 

..-.■ 1 it 
• u ould le 

Ij.J.lv NN h 

1 liis I the 1 

ii gllo 
I man of the 

I 
is a n , a pau| i In « 

\ 

in ii 
coed a hair ' 

rs Ml i 

• ; 



798 Capitalist Production. 

national wealth is, once again, by its very nature, identical 
with misery of the people. 

How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the 
colonies ? If men were willing, at a blow, to turn all the soil 
from public into private property, they would destroy certainly 
the root of the evil, but also — the colonies. The trick is 
how to kill two birds with one stone. Let the Government 
put upon the virgin soil an artificial price, independent of the 
law of supply and demand, a price that compels the immigrant 
to work a long time for wages before he can earn enough 
money to buy land, and turn himself into an independent 
peasant. 1 The funds resulting from the sale of land at a price 
relatively prohibitory for the wage- workers, this fund of money 
extorted from the wages of labour by violation of the sacred 
law of supply and demand, the Government is to employ, on 
the other hand, in proportion as it grows, to import have- 
nothings from Europe into the colonies, and thus keep the 
wage-labour market full for the capitalists. Under these cir- 
cumstances, tout sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des 
mondes possibles. This is the great secret of " systematic 
colonisation." By this plan, Wakefield cries in triumph, " the 
supply of labour must be constant and regular, because, first, 
as no labourer would be able to procure land until he had 
worked for money, all immigrant labourers, working for a time 
for wages and in combination, would produce capital for the 
employment of more labourers; secondly, because every labourer 
who left off working for wages and became a landowner, would, 
by purchasing land, provide a fund for bringing fresh labour to 
the colony." 2 The price of the soil imposed by the State must, 
of course, be a " sufficient price " — i.e., so high " as to prevent 
the labourers from becoming independent landowners until 



1 "C'est, ajoutez-vous, gr^ce a l'ap' ropriation du sol et des capitaux que l'homme, 
qui n'a que ses bras, trouve de l'occupation, et se fait un revenu . . . c'est au con- 
traire, grace a ^appropriation individuelle du sol qu'il se trouve des hommes n'ayant 
que leurs bras. . . . Quand vous mettez un horame dans le vide, vous vous emparez 
de l'atmosphere. Ainsi faites-vous, quand vous vous emparez du sol. . . . C'est le 
mettre dans le vide de richesses, pour ne le laisser vivre qu'avotre volonteV' (Colins, 
1. c, t. III., pp. 2G8-271, passim.) 

* Wakefield, 1. c, Vol. II., p. 192. 



The Modern Theory of Colo)iisatu 799 

othera had followed to take their place." 1 This 
price for the land " ii nothing but a eopfa 
tion for tl, mi which the labourer pays to i dial 

tire from the wage-labour market to ti. 
• create I capitalist " capital/ 1 with which 

the latu-r may be al exploit 1 ibourers ; then be moat 

■•-, ;it hi own expense, a locum U\ & the labour market, 
whom the I anient forwards aoroai the 
of bis old master, the coital 

It i that the English I lovernment 

yea] i tbie method of "primitive accumulation 

icril - ■■! l'\ Mr •. \Vak< ii< '.<[ < \ j ' 
The Banco wa complete h that of Bir E& 

h Ban The b1 ream of emigrat ion a 

from the Engli h colonies to tin* Tint..! Static. M«-anwl 
the advar* apitaliatic production in Europe I 

by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wal 
reei] srfiuous On the one hand, the enormo I <-'?ase- 

leas 11 u|x.n A 1 1 1 • • 1 

behind a tat i ul in I he • I be [Jnil 

>f niniiiji.it ion from Euro] men on the 

rapidly tfa 
h them an ay ( to I be 1 ther band, the 

Am ou-'lit in it.s tiain a • ■ •! >ssal n I 1 

1 . 1 . ■ in.- 1 1 1 1 • 1 

financial 1 the 

public land • n il'itiw 

llir Hi" 
tal 'I 

. for rii I ' 

ee there with i^li tin* I 

■ 

land 
loud 



8oo Capitalist Production. 

tion with the stream of men that the gold-diggings attract, 
and with the competition that the importation of English com- 
modities causes even to the smallest artisan, an ample " relative 
surplus labouring population," so that almost every mail brings 
the Job's news of a " glut of the Australian labour-market," and 
prostitution in some places there flourishes as wantonly as in 
the London Ha}anarket. 

However, we are not concerned here with the condition of 
the colonies. The only thing that interests us is the secret 
discovered in the new world by the political economy of the 
old world, and proclaimed on the house-tops : that the capital- 
ist mode of production and accumulation, and therefore 
capitalist private property, have for their fundamental condi- 
tion the annihilation of self-earned private property ; in other 
words, the expropriation of the labourer. 

favourable to the settlers, but the squandering of the land, already accomplished by 
the English Government, stands in the way. "The first and main object at which 
the new Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities for the settlement of the 
people." (The Land Law of Victoria, by the Hon. 0. G. Duffy, Minister of Public 
Lands. Lond. 1862.) 



THE END. 



WORKS AND AUTHORS QUOTED IN "CAPITAL' 



Au< I: 

'■'■ 

\. . Arbeil R Kitchen 

Geaun It 
|uiry int 

I . ,177-. 

Ai .in ipet 

itique. 

. 

.-.t liHhiii 

. 

Aiki • I i I try from thirty 

. milei roaotl M 

de 1 I 

A I 

I 
odoti, ll 

I I l . . I. • :,•. :.. : - 

« 

Mm Ik. 

■ I i. I 

■ 

A I 

I 
m .iinl 

I - I. 

• • ''i 

i ■•'» 

,, 

ii to each other. 

'•lorcltAJit I 

MMOWlfif Mtdniii- k Iit.lu.try. Ixtuioii, IflOQ 

' I 

. |.m. Iv.'.V 

.. 

A \ 



802 



Capitalist Production. 



Author. Work. Date. 

Anonymous East India Trade, The, a most pro- 
fitable Trade London, 1696 

,, Economy, Public, concentrated Carlisle, 1833 

,, Enquiry into the connection between 
the high price of Provisions and the 
size of Farms. By a Farmer London, 1773. 

,, Enquiry into the present high price 

of Provisions London, 1767. 

,, Enquiry into the causes of the pres- 
ent high price of Provisions. (See 
Forster, Nathaniel) London, 1773. 

„ Enquiry into those principles respect- 
ing the nature of Demand as lately 
advocated by Mr. Malthus London, 1821. 

,, Enquiry, A political, into the conse- 

quences of enclosing Waste Lands.. London, 1785. 

,, Essay, An, on the Governing Causes 
of the Natural rate of Interest (See 
J. Massey) London, 1750. 

,, Essay, a prize, on the Comparative 
merits of Competition and Co- 
operation London, 1834. 

.., Essay on Creditand the Bankrupt Act. London, 1707. 

., Essay on the Political Economy of 

Nations London, 1 82 1 . 

,, Essay on Public Credit London, 1710. 

,, Essay on Trade and Commerce London, 1770. 

,, Essays on Political Economy in 
which are illustrated the principal 
causes of the present National 
Distress London, 1830. 

5 , Farms, Capital, Two Letters on the 

Flour Trade, and the dearness of 
Corn. By a Person in Business,.... London, 1767. 

,, Industry of Nations, The London, 1855. 

., Inquiry. {See Enquiry) 

,, Krankheiten, Die, Welche ver- 

schiednen Standen, Altern und 
Geschlechtern eigenthtimlich sind...Ulm, 1860. 

,, Labour Defended against Capital, 

by T. H. {See Hodgskin) London, 1825. 

, s Letter, A, to Sir J. C. Banbury, Bt., 
On the high Price of Provisions. 
By a Suffolk Gentleman Ipswich, 1795. 

,, Money and its Vicissitudes. {See S. 

Bailey) London, 1 837. 

„ Outlines of Political Economy London, 1832. 

,, Observations on certain verbal dis- 
putes in Political Economy London, 1821. 



8o; 

A 

A.v 

Jth 

I. ~ '7. 

• 
I' 

of 
W ! . ~~, . 

I 
of i •!.. Lou 

' ■ ' 

iry 
:ry- 
icmc oi U 
Willi* : II. 

I', ir: . • kepi int, 1870. I 

• 
tional I) to 

I rd John RosmIL. I 

■ • 

. ; 
e of t! 

I 
I 

■ 
A I ■ 

\ 

\ ;. 
1 1 

ti' III 1*4 !!• I' I " W . . I " • 



1 




















1 


is::.. 












!i 










' 




























1 




\ 






' 














' 


\ 1 ' ;:..!..• ' • • 


ft II. Ury 














i 


!>•:. in 


\m 



804 Capitalist Production. 



Author. Work. Date. 

Barton, John Observations on the circumstances 

which influence the condition of the 

Labouring Classes of Society London, 1817- 

Barrister. A . Sophisms of Free Trade. {See under 

Anonymous). 
Beccaria, C£SARE...Elementi di Economia Pubblica. Cus- 

todi's ed. of Italian Economists Milano, 1803. 

Bellers, John Essays about the Poor, Manufacturers, 

Trade, Plantations, and Immorality. London, 1699, 
Bengal Hurkaru. (See under News- 
papers). 
Bentham, Jeremy... Th^orie des reines et des recompenses 
(d'apres des manuscrits in^dits, ed. 

by E. Dumont) Londres, 181L 

Berkeley, George.. The Querist London, 1750. 

Bidaut, J. N Du Monopole qui s'^tablit dans les 

arts industriels et le Commerce Paris, 1828. 

Bie.se, F Die Philosophie des Aristoteles Berlin, 1842. 

Blakey, Robert The History of Political Literature 

from the earliest times London, 1855. 

Blanqui, J. A Des Classes Ouvrieres en France pen- 
dant 1 annee, 1848. 

,, Cours d'economie industrielle Paris, 1835-39- 

Boisguillebert Dissertation sur la nature desrichesses, 

de l'argent et des tributs. (Ed. 

Daire) Paris, 1843. 

Boxhorn Institutiones politicse Ley den, 1663. 

Boyleatj, Etienne...Livres des metiers. (Collection de 

documents in^dits) Paris, 1835. 

Broadhurst, J Political Economy London, 1842. 

Brougham, Henry.. An Inquiry into the Colonial Policy 

of the European Powers Edinburgh, 1S03. 

Bruckner, Theorie du systeme animal Leyden, 1767. 

Buchanan, David... Inquiry into the Taxation and Com- 
mercial Policy of Great Britain Edinburgh, 1844, 

„ Smith's Wealth of Nations. With 

notes and an additional volume London, 1814. 

BucHEzetRoux Histoire Parlementaire de la Revolu- 
tion Francaise Paris, 1834-38. 

Burke, Edmund.... Thoughts and details on Scarcity London, 1S00. 

it A Letter from the Right Hon. Ed. 

Burke, to a noble lord, on the at- 
tacks made upon him and his pen- 
sion in the House of Lords by the 

Duke of Bedford, etc. Philadelphia, 1795 (?> 

Butler Hudibras. 

C. 

Cairnes, J. E The Slave Power London, 1862. 



// r orks and 4 luihors quoted in " Capital" \ 

Work, 

[FBBLL, ' i It 

( 1 1 n U . P . : l I . --at Mur J on 

■ '... : 

»» I i ' 

I. a Urn, 1 7 

■ .- 
B ' Iphi i. i • 

Em&y on tl. I agea 1. 

& .Nottl in I 

I S03. 
v ifeM in 1i:m edition ol M.ilti. I 

finitioa .. L ■ la 

I ' . . is) 

■ I ' » . i' riorny .. 

-ech at Bir- 

mingham, i / '• I St . I in , I -. 

< 'iih:iii-ii- K.,1 I m-. 1841, 

1 History of ( I irma 

D :-lin, 1 SfJ8. 
II I. i . I'.irM, 1 1 

,, Conil-i Tra<lca. ( 

••4. 
■ •■ • .1 •;.; 

met/ trl. 

I' i|..-r i 

I 
I I' .ii 

1776. 
■ I-- 1 I -onomic 

1 
\ 

I 

. Ion. |s||. 

I ' \ I 

l 
1 
« I ... 

Vri Loodoo. 1 1 • 

• '—. 
II • . 

I) 

1 



806 Capitalist Production. 

A nthor. Work. Date. 

Defence, A, of the landlords and 
farmers of Great Britain. (See 

Anon. ) London, 1814. 

De Quincey, Th The Logic of Political Economy London, 1844. 

Descartes, Rene....Discours de la Methode Paris, 1668. 

Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher 

(See Marx and Ruge) Paris, 1844. 

Diodorus SiCULUS..Bibliotheca Historica 

Discourse concerning Trade, etc. 

(See Anonymous) London, 1689. 

Discourse on the General Notions of 

Money, etc. (See Anon.) London, 1695. 

Discourse on the necessity of en- 
couraging Mechanick Industry, 

(See Anon. ) London, 1690. 

Dissertation on the Poor Laws, etc. 

(See Anon.) London, 1786. 

Dunning, T. J Trades' Unions and Strikes London, 1860. 

Dupont, Pierre Chansons Paris, 1846. 

B. 

East Indian Trade, etc., (see Anon.). London, 1696. 
Economy, Public, Concentrated, (see 

Anon.) Carlisle, 1833. 

Economist (see under Newspapers) ... 

Eden, F. M The State of the Poor London, 1797- 

Empiricus, Sextus. . Opera 

Engels, Friedrich...Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in Eng- 
land Leipzig, 1845. 

„ Umrisse zu einer Kritik der National- 

cekonomie (Deutsch-Franzosische 

Jahrbucher) .... Paris, 1844. 

„ Die Englische Zehn - Stunden - Bill 

(Neue Rheinische Zeitung April 

number) Hamburg, 1830. 

Engels, F. & Marx, K. Manifest der Kommunistischen Par- 

tei London, 1847. 

Enquiry into, etc. (see under Anony- 
mous) 

Essay, etc. (see under Anonymous) ... 

Ensor, George An Inquiry concerning the Population 

of Nations London, 1818. 

F, 

Factory Acts, Reports of Inspectors, 

(see Pari. Papers) 

FARMer, A Enquiry into the Connection, etc., 

(see Enquiry under Anonymous) ... London, 1773. 
Farms, Capital, etc., (.sec under 

Anonymous) London, 1767. 



Works an > . Xuth >■ quoted i* .'a/." 

■or. 

I. 
| !l • 

.< 

I'ki. I. A 

I 

L :■ • .i.l. 
\ I. : ft i 

I' .1 

1 I lie 

I 

tli.uii<l All flHjili. 

stent hi 

miri. W 

1 

Ed.) 

'• Tlie M of 

I 

i 

< ! I 

1 1 

II 

I 

I I \ M VI . \\ 

I. : * • .i I > -. 

1 1 » ■ eh of 

Sp>i co of 



Sc8 Capitalist Production. 

Author. Work. Dale. 

Hansard Parliamentary Debates. Speech of 

Mr. Gladstone on the Budget, April, 

16th, 1863 London, IS63. 

,, Parliamentary Debates. Speech of 

Mr. Gladstone, April 7th, 1864 London, 1864. 

Harris, James, Earl 

cf Malmesbury. ...Dialogue concerning Happiness (re- 
published in "Three Treatises," 
1765) London, 1741 

Hassall, Dr. H. H.. Adulterations detected London, 1857. 

Hegel, G. W. F Werke. Berlin, 1832-40. 

Hilaire, Geoffroi St. Notions de Philosophic Naturelle Paris, 1838. 

Hoebes, Th Leviathan. (Works).- London, 1839-44. 

Hodgskln, Th Labour Defended against Capital. 

ByT. H. (See under Anon.) London, 1825. 

,, Natural and Artificial Rights, The, of 

Property Contrasted. (Anonymous). London, 1832. 

Hollinshed Description of England 

Homer Iliad and Odyssey 

Hopkins, Th On Rent of Land London, 1828. 

Horne, Geo A Letter to Adam Smith, LL.D., On 

the Life, Death and Philosophy of 

his Friend, David Hume Oxford, 1784. 

Horner, Leonard... A Letter to Mr. Senior, etc London, 1837. 

Houghton, John Husbandry and Trade Improved London, 1727 

Ho witt, William Colonization and Christianity ..London, 1838. 

Hutton, C Course of Mathematics Reprint, London, 

1841-43. 
I. 

Industry of Nations. (See Anony- 
mous) London, 1 855. 

Inquiry. (See Enquiry under Anon. ). 

International Statistic Congress, 

Compte rendu Paris. 

Isocrates Orationes et Epistolae 

J. 

Jones, Richard An Essay on the Distribution of 

Wealth. Part I., On Rent., London, 1831. 

,, An Introductory Lecture on Political 

Economy London , 1 833. 

,, Text Book of Lectures on the Political 

Economy of Nations Hertford, 1852. 

,, Journal of the Society of Arts. (See 
under newspapers) 

K. 

Krankheiten, Die, welche verschie- 
denen Standen, Altera und Ge- 
schlechtern eigenthumlich sind Ulm, 1S80. 



Works and Auth ^09 

L. 
! \ ins toua 

les : !•■ Ill OOmm UHMll 

La ■ 

LABOURKB :ultural L il. 

I' irliamentary I\i{>«-r«). 

Lam iLLorn, Abl ..Pari H 

let Herald* [1 

« 

haaj uur lV-conoi: 

tire et sur 

1 

■ •■ ■ 

1 

prO, 1S06. ( N ^«i6. 

La ajg, I 1 ML Die ( • auf 

1 SflSL 

■ 
1 
I V.I 

I COOM* 

I! ' 

I' 

I I 

I \ll il|t ■ : 

i J .• s: „ \N i?t. 

M 

• . li'ii. K.s 

I) 

tncrco. LowlOBi IM1 

IplM nf I 
M « 



8io Capitalist Production. 

Author. Work. Date. 

Martineap, Harriet The Manchester Strike (?) 1842. 

Marx, Karl, and 

Engels, F Manif estder Kommunistischen Partei. London, 1847. 

Marx, Karl, and 

Ruge, A Deutsch-franzosische Jahrbiicher Paris, 1844. 

Marx, Karl Lohnarbeit und Kapital. (Neue 

Rheinische Zeitung, 7th April.) Koln, 1849. 

,, Misere de la philosophie : Reponse a la 

philosophie de la misere de M. 

Proudhon Paris, 1847. 

,, ZurKritik der Politischen Gikonomie. Berlin, 1859. 

Massey, J An Essay on the Governing Causes of 

the Natural Rate of Interest. (Pub. 

Anon. ) London, 1750. 

Master Spixxers and Manufacturers 

Defence Fund. (See Report.) 

Maurer Geschichte der Fronhofe Erlangen, 1862.- 

, , Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark - 

verfassung Miinchen, 1854. 

Mercier de la Riviere. (See Riviere. ) 

Merchaxt, A A Discourse on the General Notions of 

Money, &c. (See under Anonymous). London, 1695. 

Merivale, H Lectures on Colonization and Colonies. London, 1841. 

Mill, James Article " Colony," Supplement of 

Encyclopaedia Britannica Edinburgh, 1831. 

,, Elements of Political Economy London, 1821. 

Mill, John Stuart.. Essays on some Unsettled Questions 

of Political Economy London, 1844. 

,, Principles of Political Economy London, 1848. 

Mirabeau De la Monarchic Prussienne Londres, 178S. 

Molinari, G. de.... Etudes Economiques Paris, 1846. 

Mommsex, Th Romische Geschichte Berlin, 1856. 

Money and its Vicissitudes. (See S. 

Bailey. Pub. Anon.) London, 1837. 

Moxteil, Alexis Histoire des Materiaux manuscrits, 

&c Paris, 1835. 

Moxtesquieu Esprit des Lois. (Euvres Londres, 1767. 

More, Thomas Utopia 

Morxixg Star. (See under News- 
papers) 

Morton, J. C Article Labourer in Cyclopaedia of 

Agriculture 

Paper read before the Society of Arts 

Jan. 1861 

Mornixg Star. (See under News- 
papers) 

Mujs , Th England's Treasure by Foreign Trade. London, 1669.- 

Murphy Ireland, Industrial, Political, and 

Social London, 1S7CL 



Works cuni Authors quoted ii 

Author. rt 

1 Historic aii'l 

W i. . . I. linbnrgh, l 

N. 

: ii Union < 

1 v, i . I . 

»'.. Element my 

M W W I J.< | •;:• I. 

I miam, O. Ii.. A ] be 

irliaiMnf Londoo, 1810 

Hbi ... NTiwiPAraBS and lovmal 

lit ... \i H ' .:. \ki. lii DBOOth] | I I 

l tii< i 3 i. 

lUn.v Til J OKATB, 

I 

I mdon, I - 

luiif, 2nd I. 'ii. liMJtt. 

Jo' 

,, I wn; ii ■ , i 

,, 1 872. 

,. 

I. ri.|..n. 1 B 

I . I. . . 

I. ■:. i j 

Loodoa, 1S60. 
London, h' 

adoe, 1 1 

London, I 

I d I a, 1861 

.. 

„ 

i 

O. 

1821 

\ • 
I 



Si 2 Capitalist Production. 

Author. Work. Date. 

Otway, J. H Judgment of J. H. Otway, Hilary 

Sessions, Belfast 

Owen, Robert Observations on the Effects of the 

Manufacturing System London, 1S17. 

P. 

Pagnini, L.A Saggio sopra il giusto pregio delle 

cose. (Ed. Custodi) Milano, 1803. 

Parliamentary Agricultural Labourers, (Ireland) 
Papers 1862 

Census for Great Britain, Ireland and 
Wales, 1863, etc 

Children's Employment Commission 
Factory Regulation Acts, 1859 

House of Commons Committee, 1826. 

House of Lords Committee on Bank 
Act, 1848 

Reports on Bank Acts, 1857 

1 ' of Select Committee on Bank 
Acts, 1858 

Reports of Select Committee on 
Mines, 1866 

Reports of Commissioners of H. M.'s 
Inland Revenue. (Fourths Tenth).. 

Reports of Commissioners relating to 
Transportation and Penal Servi- 
tude. (1863) 

Reports of Foreign Office. (Howard 
de Welden) 

Reports of Inspectors of Factories.... 

Reports of Royal Commission on 
the Grievances of the Journeymen 
Bakers. (1862) 

Reports from the Poor Law Inspec- 
tors on the Wages of Agricultural 
Labourers in Dublin. (1870) 

Reports on Public Health 

Reports of the Registrar General 

Reports of H. M. Secretaries of Em- 
bassies and Legations on Manufac- 
tures. ( 1 S63) 

Statistical Abstract for the United 
Kingdom. (1881 and 1866) 

Statistics (Miscellaneous) of the 

United Kingdom. (1866) 

Parry, C. H The Question of the Necessity of the 

Existing Corn Laws Considered London, 1816. 



Works and Author I in "Capital." 

W rL. 

I'kc-on in i; 

i ; • . under Anon L o loo, 1 7 

m . Willuini P ilitio il i»l 

. 1 1 . . . . . ! . ' I . 

,, ntuluin rni:i_' M ,• . L ■ . 

,, A I .\u.s and ConttibU' 

ti":. 

,, Verb . Political An 

1'isro, lit i-.. I titedelal tda( bun, 1 7 7 1 . 

Plato. . i > ■ i: | i .. » . . 

i'-.- tunni I I r '. M . . . ! ' I. .:. ion. 

I'ki B iy- 

in- i - -. L ndon, I B I 

ind 
Load 
,, 

. I. I . a . 1 7"'">. 

< >euvn-s I ' ; 

Q. 

. \ . I » 1 I te sur 1«- I i: 1. 

Deir 
M kxim i . . P i M 

R. 

MB 

i 1 • ... I. I , 1^17- 

llvMv//.i>i I).- BBorbii artificam (1713). Preaeh 

i i 1 
\ . 
Wealth. Edinburgh, 

ii in I 

i 

I. i lull, l^ 

\ 

II 

1 
I II m^.n, l v «.s 

Hcicnoo CongroM, 

Health. 
meat*r> 



Si 4 Capitalist Production.. 

Author. Work. Date. 

Resolution of Working Men of Dun- 
kirk New York, 1866. 

Revolutions de Paris. (See under 

Newspapers) 

Reynolds' Newspapers. {See under 

Newspapers) 

Ricardo, David Principles of Political Economy London, 1S21. 

Richardson, B. W..Work and Overwork. (Social Science 

Review, July, 1863) London. 1863. 

Riviere, Mercier de 

la (See Mercier) 

Rodbertcs-Jaget- 

zow, C... Soziale Briefe an Kirchmann Berlin, 1850. 

Briefe, etc., Edited by Dr. R. Meyer.. Berlin, 1881. 
Rogers, James E. 

Thorold A History of Agriculture and Prices.. Oxford, 1866. 

EtosCHEB, YV Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie... Berlin, 1858. 

Rossi, P ..Cours d'Economie Politique Bruxelles, 1842. 

Rousseau, Jean- 
Jacques Discours sur l'Economie Politique Geneve, 1765. 

Roux et Buchez (See Buchez) 

S. 
Sain t-Hilaire, 

Geoffroi Notions de Philosophic Naturelle Paris, 1838. 

Say, J. B Lettres a M. Malthus .Paris, 1820. 

,, Traits de l'Economie Politique ..Paris, 1841. 

Schouw, F Die Erde, die Pflanze und der Mensch. Leipzig, 1854. 

Schclz, Wilhelm. ...Die Bewegung der Produktion Ziirich, 1843. 

Scrope, G. P Political Economy (Edited by A. 

Potter) New York, 1541. 

Senior, William 

Nassau Journals, Conversations and Essays 

relating to Ireland London, 1868. 

,, Letters on the Factory Acts London, 1837- 

,, Principes Fondamentaux de l'Econo- 

mie Politique (French translation by 

Arrivabene) ..Paris, 1833. 

,, Three Lectures on the Rate of Wages. London, 1830. 

Shakespeare, Wm. Works 

Sismondi, Simonde 

de Etudes d'Economie Politique Paris, 1837. 

„ Nouveaux Principes de l'Economie 

Politique Paris, 1819. 

,, De la Richesse Commerciale Geneve, 18DJ. 

Skarbek, F Theorie des Richesses Sociales Paris, 1829. 

Smith, Adam Wealth of Nations Aberdeen, 1848. 

Social Science Congress. (See under 
Report) 



Works and Authors quoted in %i Capital" 

Author. Work. lJ 

i oi a- • i, i - urnal of. ( 

im I 

Arte, ' In 

quiry into Industrial Pathol 
• * Letten from t:. ! inds, <>a | 

Pauline of 1847 London, 1848. 

,.....« . tatig me 

iWip i[)' 

id, Willi im A Oompendione and B unina- 

tion of oexi iyii • ordinaryoomp] unt i 

of <liv. onr country men in 

these our days (PubL Anon.) London, L58L 

\m>. ( • under Newsp 

; kb. < • under Parliament- 
ary P 

I 1 .. 
I » • Philipp • 'I • 

1340 

Stxuabt, Sir Jen. .Principl Politioal B Dublin, 177 

W irks i- m I m, L8Q5 

1 pld ..Works. (Edited by Sir William 

Hamilton) ..Edinburgh, 185 

; i 1 1 ■ ■ ■ 1 1 I I kbv ,1782 

1 1 r . 3t> Petersburg, 181& 

SrHvi'K Lnnaleof th nation London, 11 

T. 

Tr< 

: I . Pari . 1848 

Tn ! I* »litic il, Boooomio J and 

I 
'.'.' ,An In i the principle! 

dietrib W.- \X\ h London, 182 

W. T...0 B L odon, I - 

i • B bP< ponm 
1 i i i: nto 

\ 
i. 
' . . i: i . sal 

I 

i the P 
w dtfl i 1881. 

On I . ■ i i •■■ 

I W D i the Poor Las 

l^.nl..n. I M7. 
DiHtlUt i I 



I 



8x6 Capitalist Production. 

Author. Work. Date. 

TtiCKETT, J. D A History of the Past and Present 

State of the Labouring Population. London, 1S46. 

Turgot Reflexions sur la formation et la dis- 
tribution des richesses Paris, 1844. 

U. 

Ure, Andrew Philosophy of Manufactures London, 1835. 

Urquh art, David... Familiar Words London, 1858. 

,, Portfolio, New Series, (see under 
Newspapers) 

v. 

Vanderlint, Jas Money answers all things London, 1734. 

Verri, Pietro Meditazioni sulla Economia politica, 

(Ed. Custodi) Milano, 1803. 

Vissering, S Handboek van pratische Staatshuis- 

houdkunde Amsterdam, 1 860-62 . 

w. 

Wade, John ...History of the Middle and Working 

Classes London, 1833. 

Wakefield, E. G ..England and America London, 1833. 

,, Notes in his ed. of Smith's Wealth of 

Nations London, 1 S35. 

,, A view of the Art of Colonization London, 1849. 

Ward, John History of the Borough of Stoke-upon- 

Trent London, 1843. 

Watson, S (See under Society of Arts) 

Watts, John Facts and Fictions of Political Econo- 
mists Manchester, 1842. 

,, Trade Societies and Strikes Manchester, 1865. 

Wayland, F Elements of Political Economy London, 1856. 

West, Edward Price of Corn and Wages of Labour.. London, 1826. 

Wilks, Mark Historical Sketches of the South of 

India London , 1 S10- 1 7. 

Workman's Advocate, (see under 
Newspapers) 

Wright, Thomas... Short Address to the Public on the 

Monopoly of large Farms London, 1779, 

x. 

Xenophon Cy ropaedia 

Y. 
Young, Arthur Political A -ithmetic London, 1774* 



PROPERTY : 

DAVID RARY 

D 83460 0405 



mwwmm 





»»:»»j 



>sv>\v»nv>v>v>v>v> '»*»*»* fVfWfV>v^ 

>>%/>/>>»>>>>►»/>> Vtno >»>»//>>»*>> yyyyyy yyyyy yyyyyt y>\ >yy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy 

^ y yyyy yyyy y yyyy* ¥^^yy y yyyy yyyy 



>.>.».>>>»».>.>[ 



v»;^v:<>>x»x»>x>x\>>x>v»x»[»v>v>:>v>^A 



K»M 



'v»X>K>>X>J 






v»:>:k»:>:»:v 




•'^'y'yyyyyyyy 

yyyyyyyy 



>V>V» ^N^W'SW'VfSVfNVfSWfV/.VfV.W.VfVf' 

y y yy yy y y y y y yyyy y > 
•yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy 

»V»V»V» »V»V»V»V> V>WfV. V>V>V»Vf SWfNSWfV»\V>NWf'fVf fVAVfV/fVi. - 

' t '*F.F.F.F.F.F.F l F.F k >J».>.F.F.» k F k t> t F k F.>.F.>.F >.».K ^ 

'► > > > 

>'>'.\ FV^VK^ViViVKVi - . 



V*V* »V»VfV»V 

VtViV>i>V)ViV)>)V: 
y y yyyy yy y y yyyy y*- *■ K 

V*Vv» »V*YrY»V>Vv iV»V> , 

k '» > L'v > l*xw^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^I | 

'>%V»V»V>V» V>VrV»V» ^.W.SViVMv.v.vi 



XvXwlvX»v 

fy'y'y y y'y\y y y yy'i 
<'>'y'y > y*>'y'y > y'y'y'y'y*y'y', 

YiY>Y>YvY)Y>Y> m > t 

'V)VArVrV>V(V>l)! 

'»'*'*'>>»»>> > F > I 
"■>»>>> >F»F» F> 

[fI»:f:>'>;>:>!f'>V»j 



.vAVAV>V»V»V>VvV»V>V»'»V» V>V» >V»V» y*y*yWt*y*y\y*y V»V>V>V»V»V»V>V»': 
*?JJyJffyyyyyyyyyy\\ w yyyyyy f yyyy 9 yyyy 9 yyy , 

-fVfVfV.VfVfVfSV, V>WfV. >V»V>W> SV.V.SSV.VMVfViVf VfSVA *»*►*>*>'>*>» Vi 

v>^v»^^v>^^^^^^^^VF^^v►^^^^F^^ > F^^^ > >v>v,^^'.^v,v>^^ v .^^^^^^^^v>^^v>v>^ 

» v AVvAV/mYmV/»V///tY/rmV/A>YAYo^^^ 

> Ym» >%»»>* >*>%>»>% v%»> v > > » » > y y y yy y yyyyyy yyyyy > > > y > > > > > » > > > l 

rnV/y>V/yy //> > rr/y> V > yy /y I 

, , Y YYYYY YYYY YyYY YYYYY YYYY YYYY 
Y Y YYYVVYYYY YyYYYY YYY YYYY >*•>*! 

. . y yyyy/ yyyy »>»>>> yyy>M ►>//>%> 
I /»//y y*yy yyy>/)» >/>►/> »y»>/y »>, 

'.>.>.► »F. k .F>>» F>>>> >>> V FF>>> »►>>> \ >'»)'>'>'» >'>>*>*»*»►►»'>>>>*>*» F >',',*>V> ^^» > » *>*> > F » > » > ► » F > *: 

1 * * ' l ■■ ■ * v v l ' - * ^ k fc * Vi 'y y'yy'yyyyy'yyyyyyyyy'yy yyyyyyyy* y yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy y > 
* yyyy yyyy yyyy \>>y yyyy> * yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyyyy yyyy y 
\*y\ yyyyys % yyyy \\\y yyyy * yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy 
yy yyyyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy yyyy >>> >>yy >>>y 

v/AWAVAYA A A AY/A>YAY/AY* yY>V>Y>>Yi 


